One Determined Mom
by Susan Nordin

## Day 1: I am Determined

“And let us not grow weary of doing good, for in due season we will reap, if we do not give up.”
Galatians 6:9 (ESV)

It seems that no matter where you turn these days, you hear the word “determination.” Certainly it’s a required asset for most any endeavor. If you want to lose some unwanted pounds, you must be determined. To develop a thriving business, determination to overcome every obstacle is a must. Is having a great marriage on your list of priorities? Then determination is the key.
With so many areas of life demanding our time, energy, and resources, none of them carry the importance like our children. With that said, let me welcome you to your new endeavor: You are One Determined Mom!
What exactly is determination? I like to say it’s having a strong feeling that you are going to do something and that you will not allow anyone or anything to stop you.
This means that every single day, you make a conscious decision to succeed at being the best Godly mother you can be!
Before we go any further, let me take some pressure off you. Being determined to be the best Godly mother you can be doesn’t mean you have to be the “perfect” mom with
“perfect” kids. No such creature exists on earth! What it does mean is that you’re going to do everything in your power— both spiritually and naturally—to ensure your children have every opportunity to succeed in life.
Your resolve to be a determined mom primarily revolves around one thing: God’s Word. The greatest thing you can ever teach your children is how to love Jesus and the Word of God. With this strong foundation, they can begin building their own lives based on wise choices, hearing and obeying the voice of God, and valuing others, along with many other principles found in the Bible.
Making this decision is the best thing you can do for yourself and your children, but here’s something you also need to understand: Being One Determined Mom doesn’t mean you or your kids will never face adversity. What it does mean is that every time you—or they—do, you’re determined to stand no matter what comes your way.
Just by making a quality decision to be a strong, determined mom, you’re on your way to success. In your journey, always remember these three words:
Determination determines direction.
Your resolve, accompanied by your choices and actions, will determine the direction of your life.
Like me, I know you have specific things you want to see happen in your family. Maybe you need to make some adjustments first. Right now, stop and ask the Lord to show you the things you need to change. Ask Him to empower you by His Holy Spirit to live determined until you see all your heart’s desires come to pass. Now, get ready to live the best life you could ever imagine—one determined choice at a time.
For the next thirty days, keep this saying constantly in front of your eyes. Write it on your bathroom mirror. Post it on your refrigerator door. Change the background on your computer screen. Whatever you have to do, keep this in front of you:
I am too positive to be doubtful, too optimistic to be fearful, and too determined to be defeated.
Welcome to the new you... One Determined Mom.

## Day 2: Motherhood

“He gives the barren woman a home, making her the joyous mother of children. Praise the Lord!”
Psalm 113:9 (ESV)

What exactly is this thing called motherhood?
Many times, we feel as though it’s a hybrid of a teacher, nurse, taxi driver, chef, counselor, defender, maid, banker, psychologist, coach, and storyteller—sometimes, all in the same day! While the definitions of motherhood can be numerous, I like to think of it like this:
Motherhood is God entrusting you with the lives, personalities, minds, and souls of other human beings.
Merriam-Webster’s Online Dictionary defines the word
“mother” as: a female parent. Dictionary.com goes one step further saying it’s the state of being a mother. Obviously,
Mr. Merriam, Mr. Webster, and Mr. Dictionary.com aren’t mothers.
The media has definitely changed the world’s perception of motherhood. In the sixties, June Cleaver (Leave it to Beaver)
was the American mom icon. The eighties introduced us to Clair Huxtable (The Cosby Show) and Rosanne, followed by Marge Simpson (The Simpsons) and Peg Bundy (Married with Children) in the nineties. The spiral of media motherhood continued in the 2000s as Desperate Housewives became a phenomenon, followed by Keeping Up with the Kardashians. I’d say we’ve come a long way from June
Cleaver!
Regardless of how it’s described or portrayed, you can’t dismiss the fact that motherhood is undoubtedly the single most important task you will ever undertake in your life. As with any job, to really do it right requires love and passion.
But, motherhood is much more than a job—it’s a calling!
I had the privilege of growing up with a Christian mom and grandma who each took their calling as a mom very seriously. They both made a profound impact on my life and, undoubtedly, shaped me into the God-fearing woman I am today. How did they accomplish this? Mainly by living out their faith right in front of me, every single day.
My grandmother’s sincere, personal devotion to the Lord was something I witnessed on a daily basis. It wasn’t unusual for me to hear Granny Taylor in the back bedroom, on her knees, calling out to God in prayer. She did it every day. You could literally feel God’s presence in the house.
There was no doubt she had the Heavenly Father’s full attention and He was hearing her petitions.
My mom set a beautiful example of faith and trust in the Lord for me. Like Granny Taylor, Mom is one of the most powerful prayer warriors I’ve ever known. She modeled a determined, audacious prayer life; and by doing so, taught me the power of prayer. Today I know how to pray with consistent faith and, like my mom and grandmother, believe God for the incredible.
No one is expecting you to wear an “S” on your chest, the symbol of some superpower, larger-than-life, fictitious creature called “Supermom!” She doesn’t exist. But, what you can be is One Determined Mom full of passion to fulfill your divine calling as a mother.
You might be saying, “There’s no way I can ever live up to this calling,” but remember, the Bible says you can do anything through Christ who gives you strength (Philippians
4:13). If it seems like an unsurmountable task, pray and ask the Holy Spirit to give you the passion you need to fulfill His divine calling.
Motherhood is, by far, the greatest gift you could ever give your children. True, the pay isn’t great and the corporate ladder is non-existent, but there’s no greater calling than to be a mom—a Godly, Spirit-led mom—to your children. I like to say it like this:
A loving mother is the heart of a family's happiness.
No matter what challenges you’re facing as a mother, you can do it! You can be the greatest influence in your children’s lives. You can raise your kids to know and love God with all their hearts. You can do it. You are One
Determined Mom!

## Day 3: One Powerful Force

“I press toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.”
Philippians 3:14

Mt. Everest, with its peak reaching 29,029 feet above sea level, is the highest mountain on planet earth. Every year, hundreds of people from all across the globe attempt the monumental task of climbing to the top of this mammoth peak. The physical training required to endure the three-month climb is incredible, not to mention the $50,000 it takes to make the journey. Even with all the preparation and investment, only one out of four climbers will actually reach the summit.
In 1987, Dr. Beck Wethers, accompanied by a lady friend, attempted the quest to climb Mt. Everest. Well into their hike, they encountered a blinding snow storm. Temperatures dropped thirty to fifty degrees below freezing and the blistering winds howled at sixty miles per hour. By the time mountain rescuers found them, Dr. Wethers’ lady companion had already died and he, with a sheet of ice covering his entire face, showed no signs of life. Assuming they both were dead and with the weather conditions worsening, rescuers returned to base camp.
Miraculously, Dr. Wethers revived and slowly began to snake his weary body down the mountain. Snow-blinded and frozen, he maneuvered his way, very Frankenstein-like, along dangerous, icy paths with 1,000-foot drops on both sides. When he arrived, rescue workers were stunned. When asked how he made it all the way down, Dr. Wethers simply replied, “I decided, I was either going to make it back to camp or fall off the mountain to my death, but I was not going to just lay there.”
One powerful force saved Dr. Wethers’ life that day: sheer determination!
In the late 1800’s a young military-raised man was pursuing his lifelong dream to attend West Point Military Academy.
How disappointed he must have been to receive notice that he had failed the examination and was denied acceptance.
Not to be deprived, he applied once more. Again, the same disappointing response. Still, he pursued applying for a third time. This time the results were different. With a 93% score on his exam, this young man’s dream was about to come true.
Who was this persistent young man? Douglas MacArthur, who went on to be General Douglas MacArthur, a five-star general in the U.S. Army who led troops in World War II.
What powerful force kept him pursuing his dream?
Sheer determination.
Ludwig van Beethoven was a child prodigy and musical genius. At five years old, he masterfully played the violin. By the time he was thirteen, he astounded audiences as a concert organist. At the age of twenty, he studied under Hayden and Mozart, who both agreed Beethoven would grace the world with extraordinary music. He did just that, composing nine majestic symphonies, five concertos for piano, scores of chamber music pieces, along with hundreds of sonatas for violin and piano.
Today, Beethoven is one of the most well-known musical icons in history, but he was no stranger to adversity.
In his twenties, Beethoven began to lose his hearing. By age fifty, he had become completely deaf. But, even deafness couldn’t keep this master musician from the music he loved.
He eventually cut off the legs of his piano, sat it on the floor, and then lay flat on the ground beside it to feel his music through the floor vibrations. One day, after he became stone deaf and could no longer hear the music, Beethoven was heard slamming the keys with both fists and screaming to the top of his lungs: “I will take life by the throat! I will not let life defeat me! I will not let setbacks defeat me!”
Beethoven went on to compose several string quartets and his ninth symphony after losing his hearing.
What powerful force guided Beethoven through socalled physical limitations? Sheer determination.
Obviously, you and I probably aren’t going to climb Mt.
Everest, become a decorated war hero, or compose worldrenowned music; we have a different calling, a higher responsibility: to raise our children and nurture our families.
But don’t kid yourself, to pull off this monumental task will require no less determination!
Sometimes you have to stand your ground, roll up your sleeves, and say, “I refuse to quit! I refuse to give in to adversity! I WILL WIN!” You’re not in this fight alone.
Remember, with God on your side, how can you lose?
You are One Determined Mom!

## Day 4: Rizpah

“But you, be strong and courageous, for your work will be rewarded.”
2 Chronicles 15:7 (NLT)

Of all the amazing stories in the Bible concerning women and mothers, one stands out in an extraordinary fashion. It’s the account of a mother far less popular than Ruth, Esther, or Mary. It’s the story of Rizpah.
The story begins with Israel experiencing three years of famine. When King David sought the Lord for a reason,
God gave him a specific answer. During the reign of King Saul, David’s predecessor, Saul murdered innocent people among the tribe of the Gibeonites. Now Israel was paying for this injustice. (See 2 Samuel 21:1-10.)
King David was moved to action and immediately called a meeting with the Gibeonites to resolve the issue. Their demand was simple: “blood for blood.” The Gibeonites required seven of King Saul’s sons be put to death. King David granted their request and all seven of Saul’s sons were crucified at the same time. Five were raised by Saul’s daughter, Michal, while the other two were the sons of
Rizpah.
Can you imagine the anguish that tormented this grieving mother’s mind? Perhaps she pounded her chest as she watched her two sons die in such a gruesome manner.
Now, to add to her suffering and humiliation, her sons would be shamefully exposed, left outside to rot in the merciless elements, and subjected to the ravenous animals. But Rizpah was not to be denied. She was a determined mom.
For five solid months, twenty-four hours a day, Rizpah kept watch over her two sons’ corpses. I can just see her laying on her sackcloth rug, her skin browned from the extreme heat, her hair matted together from the long days and nights of strong winds and rains. There she sat, like a guard on watch, ensuring no claw or paw would be laid upon the bodies of her dead sons.
You can only imagine how terrified she must have been during the night, sitting in the pitch black darkness, frequently seeing the gaze from a savage beast’s glowing set of eyes as they anxiously awaited to pounce on their prey. With no friend to hold her hand, no pastor to comfort or encourage her, and no family in which to share sympathy, Rizpah was alone... completely alone. Despite loneliness, impending danger, hunger, physical exhaustion, hopelessness, and grief,
Rizpah’s resolve remained, “I will NOT let anything or anyone have my sons!”
What drove this mother to act in such a way? One word:
love. She loved; and because she loved, she was devoted;
and because she was devoted, she persevered.
Think about this scenario for a minute. Here’s a mother who was so determined to protect her sons, no matter what was required—and they were dead! The question is this: Do we have the same determination to protect our living children as this woman did her dead ones?
This is the kind of fortitude that’s required in every determined mom—to never give up on our children! No matter what they do or say, we must always believe that they will be what and who God created them to be.
Can you have this type of intense determination for your living children? I believe you can!
You can be a modern-day Rizpah.

## Day 5: Third-Class Parenting

“I can do all things [which He has called me to do] through Him who strengthens and empowers me [to fulfill His purpose—I am self-sufficient in Christ’s sufficiency; I am ready for anything and equal to anything through Him who infuses me with inner strength and confident peace.]”
Philippians 4:13 (AMP)

Research mastermind, George Barna, recently released a new book entitled, Revolutionary Parenting. The book is based on an unusual research study which indicates that there are six critical dimensions involved in raising children to become spiritual champions.
It also describes three types of parenting which are the most common approaches in the U.S.: parenting by default, trialand-error parenting, and revolutionary parenting.
Let’s examine these a little closer.
Parenting by default. This is what Barna termed “the path of least resistance.” In this approach, parents do whatever comes naturally to them, as influenced by cultural norms and traditions. Their motto seems to be, “Can’t we all just get along?” The objective in this style of parenting is simple: to keep everyone— parent, child, and others—as happy as possible. Those who subscribe to the parenting by default method also don’t allow important or prioritized aspects of their life to be overridden by their parental responsibilities.
Trial-and-error parenting. This is a very common alternative to parenting by default. This approach is based on the notion that every parent is an amateur at raising children; thus, there are no absolute guidelines to follow.
This method also says that the best parents can do is experiment, observe outcomes, and then improve based upon their successes and failures in child rearing.
The “good” news in using this approach is, the goals of parenting are to continually improve and perform better than most other parents.
As if the definitions of these first two categories aren’t startling enough, so are their results. Barna explains, “Parenting by default and trial-and-error parenting are both approaches that enable parents to raise their children without the effort of defining their life.” What? Raising your kids without helping to define their lives? It’s easy to see why these would be the most common techniques; they require the least amount of effort and carry the least amount of spiritual responsibility. But, there is a better way.
Revolutionary parenting. This was the one style of parenting Barna found to be the least common approach. Why? Mainly because such nurturing requires the parent taking God’s Word, regarding life and family, at face value and applying those truths faithfully and consistently.
Barna describes this “third class” of parenting this way:
“Revolutionary parenting, which is based on one’s faith in God, makes parenting a life priority. Those who engage in revolutionary parenting define success as intentionally facilitating faith-based transformation in the lives of their children, rather than simply accepting the aging and survival of the child as a satisfactory result.”
The choice is up to you. You can parent without putting forth the effort to define your child’s life (which is really one step above babysitting) or you can make parenting a life priority and transform the lives of your children. According to Barna’s findings, being a “third class” parent could actually be more accurately described as “top rate!”

## Day 6: Legacy

"But the love of the Lord remains forever with those who fear him. His salvation extends to the children’s children of those who are faithful to his covenant, of those who obey his commandments!"
Psalm 103:17-18 (NLT)

I once heard it said that your heritage is a gift to you from your past, but your legacy is a gift from you to the future. I couldn’t agree more.
My heritage—the gift given to me—was nothing short of amazing. Granny Taylor and Mom were more than just good influences in my life, they literally left me a legacy of prayer, honor, respect, and an undying love for God.
My grandparents pastored a small Assembly of God Church in Oppelo, Arkansas. This was where my parents, my brothers, and I attended church. Since my grandparents were our babysitters, my brothers and I spent a great deal of time at their house. Most days we would play
“church,” meaning my brother would preach and I would pretend to play the piano. At the end of the “service,” he would give the altar call and I would be the “sinner” who responded. (I think I got saved over 2,000 times!)
After my grandparents went to be with the Lord, my family allowed me to choose something of theirs as a keepsake. I knew immediately what I wanted: one of Grandpa’s Bibles (the last one he used before he passed away) and my grandmother’s Bible. Grandpa’s Bible was so precious to me, as it still had notes of his most recent sermons. The night I was ordained, I carried that Bible on stage with me. Granny Taylor’s Bible was a treasure, as well; it contained pictures of her family and a floral handkerchief.
These treasures, and many more, have been gentle reminders of the incredible legacy of faith left to me. What a wonderful heritage! My grandparents passed their faith on to my parents, who in turn passed it on to me; and I have continued that legacy with my children and now my grandchildren.
Sometime ago I came across a poem called, “The Dash.”
If you’ve never read it, it’s definitely worth taking five minutes of your day. (You can access it at http://www.linda-ellis.com/ the-dash-the-dash-poem-by-linda-ellis-.html.) The gist of the writing is this: When we are gone from this life, our tombstones will have the date we were born, the date we died, and a dash in the middle. The most important aspect is what the dash represents. What did we do with our lives that will outlive us? How did we secure a legacy of faith, love, honesty, prayer, and godliness to those who will come behind us? What will our dash say about us?
My desire is for the legacy I leave my children and grandchildren to be that of a God-fearing, determined mom. I want them to remember me as one who loved God with all her heart, one who loved others, one who preached about the goodness of God, one who read the Bible to them, and one who stood in the gap and prayed. Believe me, these things are more valuable than money could ever buy.
Maybe you have a rich Christian heritage such as mine, or you might be a first-generation Christian in your family.
Either way, you can pass on a legacy of faith to future generations.
What legacy do you want to leave for your children and grandchildren? When you’re gone from this earth, how will they remember you? What traits will stand out when they speak of you? Take a moment to write down how you want to be remembered, then start doing them!
Legacies don’t just happen; they must first be lived.
Let’s live and leave a great one!

## Day 7: Lead the Way

“Train up a child in the way he should go [and in keeping with his individual gift or bent], and when he is old he will not depart from it.”
Proverbs 22:6 (AMPC)

Let’s face it, the pressures and responsibilities of being a mom are never-ending. However, one determination rises above the rest: to lead our children to God. Without this factor being a top priority, everything else is almost in vain.
While it’s vitally important to have our children grounded in church and around good, Godly influences, the best way to ensure they love and serve the Lord is to be an example in front of them in word and deed. Yes, it’s tough at times, but this obligation comes with a guarantee which far outweighs the burden: When they are old, they will not depart from it. It’s true, when we plant God’s seed in their hearts and souls, His Word will not return void
(Isaiah 55:11).
There are many ways in which you, One Determined Mom, can raise your kids in the Lord. Here are a few points that if you’ll teach them to your children, the Bible promises that when they’re old, they won’t be lost.

Provide a complete set of instructions for every step of life. One of the most powerful teachers your child will ever encounter in their lifetime will be you, their mother. Consequently, you should never leave anything to chance when it comes to instructing your children. Neither is it wise to assume they know certain activities are a prescription for disaster. Make a list of the things you unconditionally want your children to know and methodically teach them those things.

Constantly teach your child. You can never take for granted that your kids automatically know how to be a committed Christian, a good citizen, a faithful wife/husband, a devoted mother/father, or a high-valued employee. Each of these things
(and others) must be taught, over and over again. Don’t leave it up to the school system, the children’s/youth pastors, or someone in the neighborhood. The responsibility to transmit such information is yours.

Instruct them how to escape danger. It’s no surprise that the world we live in is a dangerous place; thus, your children must be instructed in how to minimize the risks they face. One of the best ways to avoid danger is to simply not invite it in! Risky behavior carries the consequences of sin.
True, sin can be forgiven, but it has the propensity to leave scars. Your obligation is to help minimize the collateral damage by teaching your kids how to avoid as many pitfalls as possible.

Show your kids how to appropriate the blessings of God in their lives. It’s great to talk to your kids about God and even better to read the Word to them and with them every day, but nothing takes the place of involving them in spiritual activity.
While your children are smaller or still at home, include them in your family prayer times, especially for specific needs. Then, when they see the promises of God manifest, they will know how to appropriate His blessings in their own lives.

Instill the fear of God in your children. So many kids equate the “fear of God” with the “wrath of Mom!” The fear of God isn’t being afraid of God;
it’s respecting Him with a holy reverence. This is a lost value in the day we live in. Teach your children how God is wildly in love with them, and then how to respect and honor the One who loves them the most.

Demonstrate the power of prayer. How well I remember watching Granny Taylor walk into her bedroom to pray. I knew when she shut the door, it wasn’t going to be some five or ten-minute,
“Bless me,” prayer. No, Granny wasn’t coming out until she touched Heaven. (We used to call that
“praying through.”) The power of prayer is your child’s greatest advocate. You are their biggest fan, top cheerleader, and greatest intercessor.
Never let a day go by that you don’t exercise your right—and responsibility—to pray for and with your children.
Let me challenge you to make a “Top Ten” list of the things you most desire your children to learn about God.
Then, start teaching and living those principles out in front of them. Tell them how they can believe for and accomplish the same things you have—and more. Train up your child, and watch them grow in the Lord!
There’s no greater achievement.

## Day 8: Sticks and Stones

“Words kill, words give life; they're either poison or fruit—you choose.”
Proverbs 18:21 (MSG)

I’m fairly certain that the person who came up with the saying, “Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me,” was either brain dead or they were never on the receiving end of harsh, critical, or degrading comments. This statement could not be any further from the truth.
The Bible is very clear about the power of our words spoken over others, especially our children. Job 4:4 says:
“Your words have put stumbling people on their feet, put fresh hope in people about to collapse.” (MSG)
Positive, affirming words can help a faltering child regain their footing and bring fresh hope to one on the brink of collapse. In the same way, negative words can bring damaging results.
I found a recent survey very fascinating. The survey asked mothers to keep track of how many negative comments, compared with positives ones, they made to their children. The results were astounding. Moms who participated admitted to criticizing their children ten times for every one time they said something favorable. That’s right, ten to one!
Here’s another one: A three-year survey in a particular school found that teachers were negative in their remarks to students 75% of the time. The same study also indicated that it takes four positive statements from a teacher to offset the effects of one negative statement made to the same child.
Everyday our kids are bombarded with negativity, thoughts and messages of how they fail more than succeed.
If you don’t believe it, just take a look at the next test your child brings home from school. More than likely, the teacher will write how many questions they missed rather than how many they answered correctly.
Children require frequent encouragement, direction, and affirmation. They need to be told, as well as shown, that they are loved and valued. Of course, this is easy when they do everything we ask or expect. It can be much more difficult in those times when we are disappointed with their actions or behavior. The fact is, no matter how wonderful our kids are, they will probably make decisions we don’t agree with. But even in their wrongdoing, we should always convey our relentless love.
Our role as a parents is to demonstrate the God-kind of unconditional, unwavering love to our children. Doing this not only builds a strong bond, but it also demonstrates and opens their eyes to the love of their Heavenly Father.
When is the last time you told your son or daughter, “I believe in you,” “I value you,” or “You’re a treasure to me,”?
If it wasn’t today, then it’s been too long! Start today. Speak words of life and encouragement. No matter the circumstances, determine to affirm.

## Day 9: Mad Maxine

“And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with singing, with everlasting joy on their heads. They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.”
Isaiah 35:10

Have you ever been around someone who never seems to have any joy in their life? I mean, no matter what—good, bad, or indifferent—their face always looks like they’ve been sucking on a lemon all day!
These are the people who, if you handed them a check for a million dollars, would gripe about the taxes. I know I’ve come across people like this, and I have a name for them:
Actually, some days, I am her!
Mad Maxine is a person who says things like:

“If you need a shoulder to cry on, pull off onto the side of the road.”

“If you haven’t noticed, my blood type is negative!”

“If you’re happy and you know it, thank your meds!”

“I just found out I have IBES... Irritable Because of Everything Syndrome.”
I think Mad Maxine desperately needs two things: Jesus and a good dose of joy!
It’s no surprise that life can, at times, be very difficult.
There are times in all of our lives where no matter how hard we try, things go awry. Hard times, dry times, times of longsuffering—we’ve all been there. The question isn’t, “Will hard times come?” The question is, “How will we navigate through those difficult seasons?” I know, for a fact, one word that can get you through any hard spot: JOY!
It might surprise you how many times the word “joy” is found in the Bible. You’ll find it in the Old Testament 155 times and in the New Testament sixty-three times. The word
“rejoice,” which means to have joy over and over again, appears in the Old Testament thirty-two times and eighteen times in the New Testament. I think it’s pretty clear to see:
God is serious about us experiencing joy!
I have a friend named Joyce, and I just love what her grandkids call her: “My Joy!” Isn’t that awesome? As women of grace, we should be so full of joy—even in trying times— that when other people get around us they get joy, too.
That’s called contagious joy, and it’s where you and I need to live!
To keep joy in your heart 24/7, 365 days a year is a challenge. But, here are a few ways to help you stay full of joy:

Keep a God-perspective of yourself. Ask God to show you the way He sees you. Sometimes we’re our own worst enemies! When you see yourself as God sees you, joy is on the way.

Embrace the process of life. Don’t look now, but life is a process. Not every day is great; some are better than others. Either way, you can have joy on the mountaintop and joy in valley.

Commit to having a good attitude. There’s only one person who can control your attitude, and you look at her every morning in the mirror!
Determine to look at what’s good in the world, in your family, and in you. Attitude is a choice— choose to have a good one.

Learn to give to others. One of the best ways to change your outlook on life is to find and help someone who is less fortunate than you. The Dead Sea is dead because it has no outflow. Living a life of unselfishness will revive your joy.

Be thankful where you are. On the way to where you’re going, always have joy where you are. It’s not about what you have, but about being thankful for what you have.
Find as many ways as you can to stay joyful throughout the day. For me, I have “The Happy Song” as my cell phone’s ring tone. Sometimes I don’t even answer the phone because I’m dancing and singing along, knowing that “happiness is the truth!”
It’s time to tell Mad Maxine, “See ya’ later!” Instead, replace her with:
“This is the day the Lord has made, I will rejoice and be glad in it.”
Psalms 118:24
Live with contagious joy!

## Day 10: Don’t Worry, Momma!

“Casting all your care upon Him, for He cares for you.”
1 Peter 5:7

Okay, confession time: I’m one of those people they call a “worry wart!” Now before you call the prayer team to start interceding for me, let me explain that I don’t worry about everything; I know better.
But there are some areas (like my kids and grandbabies)
that I think every mom/grandmom has a tendency to be overly concerned with at times. It’s just in our nature.
I remember the first night I held our first grandbaby,
Braden. As I was holding that 8 lb., 14 oz. bundle of pure joy, I had a talk with God. I said, “God, according to Ephesians 2:10, I know you already have Braden’s path planned for him. You’ve gifted him with talents, abilities, strengths, and anointings. He’s just got to discover all You’ve planned for him.” Of course in my mind I added,
“But SueSue’s (my grandma nickname) gonna worry about it until he figures it out!”
There are so many things in life we can worry about— things like our families, our health, our finances, our children’s futures, just to name a few. We face so many decisions every single day. One day, I came across some information that I need to post somewhere and read it every time I wake up at three o’clock in the morning worrying about something. It basically said this:

40% of what we worry about will never happen.

30% has already happened.

12% is unfounded criticism from others.

10% is over our health.
The remaining 8% are actual problems we face, but usually can’t do anything about!
What this says is that 92% of what we worry about is unnecessary. (Really, it’s 100%, if we turn the last 8% over to God.) Basically, in general, we just worry too much. I mean,
I know some people who are worried that they’re worrying!
The Bible has a great antidote for the disease of worry, and it’s one of my favorite verses:
“But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.”
Philippians 4:19 (KJV)
Most of the time, we think of this verse in the area of financial provision, but it stretches far beyond money. Our Father God wants us to know that He’s able to meet every need in our lives.
This verse contains five very powerful things that will stop worry dead in its tracks. In this verse, we find:

A Provider. God is our provider, no matter what we need. The Bible says that He will never leave us, never forsake us, never mislead us, never forget us, and never overlook us. What we need, God has already provided.

A Promise. The Scripture says that God “shall supply,” which means to fulfill or fill full—no questions asked.

A Provision. One of the Hebrew names for God in the Old Testament is Jehovah-Jireh. It means God will provide or God will see to it! There’s no need to worry; God will make sure every need is met. (See Genesis 22:14.)

A “Plenty.” There’s no “get by” in God and there’s nothing small about His provision.
Through His Word, He’s already underwritten every need we will every encounter. As a matter of fact, He’s put up Heaven as the collateral for our needs!

A Person. Jesus is the Mediator between God and man. He is both the channel from which our supply flows and the person in it’s found.
When the overwhelming urge to worry tries to come on you, remember the words of Jesus:
“Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.”
Matthew 6:34 (NIV)
Troubles come and troubles go. Cast your worry over on
Jesus.
Don’t worry, Momma! He’s got you in the palm of His hand.

## Day 11: D.F.Z.

“I said to myself, ‘Relax and rest. God has showered you with blessings. Soul, you’ve been rescued from death; eye, you’ve been rescued from tears; and you, foot, were kept from stumbling.”
Psalms 116:7-8 (MSG)

By looking at this day’s subject, you’re probably already wondering, “What in the world does D.F.Z.
stand for?” Well, it’s a place where every One Determined Mom needs to live, every day. Welcome to the
Drama-Free Zone!
If you haven’t noticed, we are emotional creatures.
We can cry at the drop of a hat, fly off the handle at our spouse or children for little to no reason, and be swept off our feet by a simple, “I love you,” and a good box of chocolates! God made us as emotional beings, which can be a blessing and—if not handled correctly—a not-so-much blessing.
Do you know what emotions and the flu have in common? They’re both extremely contagious. How we react to certain issues can set the tone—not only in us, but also in our husbands and children. When trouble comes, many times we focus more on the issue at hand and forget to monitor the most important part: our response. Pastor Charles Swindoll once said, “I am convinced that life is 10% of what happens to me and 90% of how I react to it.” Focus on the 90%.
Sometimes, we all need to take what I call a “Drama-
Free Vacation”—or D.F.V. Now, this isn’t a place in the Caribbean with sparkling, turquoise water and white sandy beaches—even though that would be just fine, too! A Drama-
Free Vacation is a time when you make a decision to live drama-free for a week. How do you accomplish this? It’s really easier than you might think. For one week, determine in your heart to do these things:

Change your response. Instead of responding to every little thing like it’s the end of the world, change the way you react. No matter what it is,
God’s got this. Remember, focus on the 90%!

Be mindful of your facial expressions. Do you remember the song we used to sing as kids, “If you’re happy and you know it...”? Sometimes I see women, and I want to tell them, “If you’re happy and you know it, tell your face!” During your D.F.V., smile, be happy, and go out of your way to brighten someone’s day. Emotions are contagious, especially the good ones.

Relax! What’s a vacation without relaxation, right? Take seven days and trade in the drama for some relaxation. Take walks, get a massage, watch your favorite movies. Whatever you do to relax, do it!

Laugh at yourself. There’s a Beatitude that I believe was somehow left out of the Bible. It says, “Blessed are those who can laugh at themselves, for they shall never cease to be amused!” Okay, it wasn’t supposed to be in the Bible, but it’s full of truth nonetheless. Take the pressure off yourself. Remember, you’re determined, not perfect.
The best remedy for drama is praise. When you’re praising God for all His goodness, mercy, grace, and faithfulness, it’s hard to live in drama. Whatever you praise increases in your life. If you magnify your circumstances, they will get larger.
Magnify God and He becomes bigger than anything you’re facing. Allow God to turn your mourning into dancing. (See
Psalms 33:10.)
Decide today to live in the D.F.Z. Take a D.F.V. Look at yourself in the mirror and say, “There might be drama on the outside, but I’m in the Bahamas on the inside!” Oh, and one more thing—a VERY important thing: Say, “NO,” to O.P.D.—
Other People’s Drama. You’ll be glad you did!

## Day 12: Finding Purpose

“‘For I know the plans I have for you,’ declares the Lord, ‘plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.’”
Jeremiah 29:11

There’s a crisis in our world today, especially among our young people. It’s not sex, drugs, or rock-n-roll, which were the three “biggies” in my teenage years. No, it’s much more profound. Today, our children are plagued with an identity crisis—trying to identify who they are, what they are, and why they are here on this earth.
A majority of these feelings come from the world’s system which they are naturally exposed to. Think about it.
How would you feel if, for eighteen years, you were told,
“A cosmic explosion happened millions of years ago and
‘POOF!’ you were born!”? Is it any wonder our children struggle with the thought that they merely exist on this planet from day to day with no clear direction in life? That may be what they hear from the world, but we—One Determined Moms—have a much different story to tell.
No matter what our kids may hear in school or around their friends, the most influential voice in their life (outside of God) is us—their mothers! We need to maximize every opportunity that arises and constantly affirm that they carry a divine purpose to fulfill on this earth. If they don’t believe it, then simply have them look at their thumbprint. In all of history, there’s never been another person on this planet who shares the exact same thumbprint as theirs. That’s how unique they are to God!
One of the best ways to help our children find their purpose is by putting them in the position to serve others.
Thankfully, at a young age, I discovered what God had created me to do: serve His people. I loved every minute of it then, and I still love it today. When our kids understand that their life isn’t about what they receive, but what they have to give to others, it can open their eyes to their divine calling.
Along with serving, we can release our children into their purpose by speaking the right words over them. Sometimes a lack of purpose presents itself as misbehavior, depression, lack of motivation, boredom, etc. For a person who lacks purpose, there’s no better kick starter than a mom who knows the Word and boldly speaks it over her children’s life!
Ask the Lord to begin revealing to you and to your children His purpose for their lives. Begin declaring it over them daily, sometimes multiple times a day. Reinforce those declarations by reminding them that God truly does have a plan precisely for them, and then pray every day that God reveals His will to them in undeniable ways. Lastly, teach your children to pray and ask God for His direction. Learning to hear His voice at an early age will pave the way for them to recognize His leading later in years.
For your house, the crisis is over. All of your children will walk and live in the heavenly purpose designed specifically for their lives... in Jesus’ name!

## Day 13: Love Struck

“I’m absolutely convinced that nothing—nothing living or dead, angelic or demonic, today or tomorrow, high or low, thinkable or unthinkable—absolutely nothing can get between us and God’s love because of the way that Jesus our Master has embraced us.”
Romans 8:37-39 (MSG)

The very first time I held my children and grandchildren, I was completely love struck. Here was this tiny person I didn’t even know, yet I would so gladly have given up my own life to save theirs.
That was just the beginning.
Isn’t amazing how we respond to our kids as they grow up? When they spit up on us for the first time, we say,
“Oh, how cute is that? You’re so precious!” Then come the potty-training years. The first time they actually use the toilet on their own, we cheer like we just won the lottery!
As strange as it may be, it’s the truth.
The greatest thing about this is that our kids don’t have to earn our love; we love them based on their mere existence. When my kids grew older, anytime they would just come through the door, I was happy to be in their presence. If they gave me a hug, it was an added bonus. But even if they didn’t, just seeing their face made my day.
There’s another relationship where this exact same scenario occurs—it’s the relationship between you and your Heavenly Father. When you start to see yourself the way God sees you, you begin to understand one of the most powerful things about being His child:
God cares more about your presence than your performance.
I love Thanksgiving time, mainly because it’s a time our family pretty much shuts everything down for a few days just to be together. For about a week, we do nothing but spend time in each other’s presence—no agendas, no schedules, no meetings, no commitments... except to be together.
We all know the value of coming into the presence of God, but do you know He loves you being there, too? Your Heavenly Father is madly in love with you. He loves you with an unending, radical love—too full to measure and too deep to comprehend. Of course, it’s even better when you stop and pour your affection on Him.
What mom doesn’t like it when their children or grandchildren jump up in their lap, hug their neck or kiss their cheek and say, “You’re the best! I love you so much!”
Not only does your heart melt, but at that moment they could ask you for the moon and you’d find a way to get it to them!
Again, it’s the exact same way with your Heavenly Father. You are His special creation. Nothing you can do or not do will ever change His love for you. You can never be so good that you don’t need the love of God, nor be so bad that you don’t deserve it. Get this one thought lodged in your heart and mind:
Your Heavenly Father is love struck with you!
And because He is, you can trust Him with your entire life.

## Day 14: Divine Design

“Then God said, ‘Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness;...’”
Genesis 1:26a

Two of my favorite scriptures in the Bible are found in Psalms 139:14-15:

“I will praise You, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; Marvelous are Your works, And that my soul knows very well. My frame was not hidden from You, When I was made in secret, And skillfully wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.”
The Message version is even more fascinating, as it says:
“I thank you, High God—you’re breathtaking! Body and soul, I am marvelously made! I worship in adoration—what a creation. You know me inside and out, you know every bone in my body; You know exactly how I was made, bit by bit, how I was sculpted from nothing into something.”
The very last part of that verse, “... sculpted from nothing into something,” has always blown my mind. When we look at how our bodies are so perfectly engineered, to think that God created such a complex, living, breathing organism from dirt is nothing more than mind-boggling. The scripture is right: “What a creation!”
Just think about the creation known as “you” for a second. Your body is totally amazing! Consider that your skin has more than a half-million sensory receptors scattered all through it. Your blood runs through 60,000 miles of arteries, veins, and capillaries. Your brain has 100 billion neurons, which means you can have more ideas in your noggin than the number of all the known atoms in the universe! Your head contains 100,000 hairs. (Well, most heads do anyway.)
Your heart will spontaneously beat over 2.5 billion times in your lifetime. Your body is so incredibly designed, it completely regenerates over the course of seven years.
All of this, from dirt!
Not only is it important that we understand just how special we are to God, but even greater is the need to teach our children how special they are to God. Modern-day science, education, and media all point our children towards the mindset that they just “happened”—or even worse, they were an “accident.” This is not what the Bible says and, consequently, is not who they are. Instead, they are each a divine design created in the mind and heart of God; and it’s our responsibility to make sure they know this truth.
With that said, here are a few things to teach your children about who they are in God’s eyes:

They are God’s creation and are not here by chance. There are no “accidental” births in this world. From the beginning of time, God knew them and has their lives in His hands.

They are the result of intelligent design and eternal purpose. Genesis 1:26-27 says they were created in the very likeness and image of God Himself. Also, Ephesians 1:4 assures them that they were chosen before the foundations of the world to live holy and blameless before
God.

They are spiritual, not alien beings. One of the most valuable lessons you can teach your children is since they are made like God, who is a three-part being, they are also three-part beings—spirit, soul, and body. Your children are spirits first. Not only are they first and foremost spirits, but according to 2 Peter 1:4, they can also partake in God’s very nature!

There’s a purpose for their existence. Life without purpose is frustrating and miserable.
Your children were born on purpose and for a purpose. Help them find it.

They are God’s masterpiece. God doesn’t make junk! He doesn’t even make average. Ephesians
2:10 describes who your children really are:
“God’s masterpieces!” They are valuable, esteemed, and precious in their Creator’s sight.
They truly are a divine design.
How can it be any better? We are made in the image and likeness of God, we have God as the Father of our spirits, we have been placed on this earth for a divine purpose and mission, and we are God’s masterpieces! Our mission, as moms, is to teach our children these life-changing truths. While you’re at it, always remind them that their life isn’t about them; it’s about the Kingdom of God manifested on this earth.

## Day 15: The Hot Water Bottle

"It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear."
Isaiah 65:24

I was so blessed to have parents and grandparents who believed in the power of prayer. It wasn’t just a Sunday ritual; they prayed every single day. At my house, we prayed for everything—bloody noses, stumped toes, hang nails, etc. You name it, we prayed for it! How eternally thankful I am that not only was prayer a top priority in my parents’ and grandparents’ lives, they also taught me how to make it a top priority in my life.
One day while searching the Internet, I came across a fascinating lady, an English missionary doctor named, Dr.
Helen Roseveare. Dr. Roseveare traveled all over the world, but what happened on one of her missionary journeys in the central African country of Zaire caught my attention.
One night during this particular journey, Dr. Roseveare had worked several hours with a village woman to deliver her baby. Despite all her efforts, the mother died, leaving behind a tiny, premature baby and a crying two year-old daughter.
Without electricity, oxygen, and a sufficient neonatal facility for premature babies, keeping the newborn alive through the night would be difficult, if not impossible. Just then, a student midwife found a box to house the baby.
Another found a wool blanket to swaddle the newborn. Still, another student stoked up a fire to fill a hot water bottle in hopes to keep the baby warm. All systems were go... until,
POP! The water bottle suddenly burst. Frantic with despair, the intern cried out, “This was our last hot water bottle!”
Dr. Helen gave the intern two specific instructions: first, to keep the baby as close to the fire as possible and, second, to sleep between the newborn and the door in order to shield it from cold drafts.
Grieved by the morning’s activities, Dr. Helen went to pray with as many of the orphanage children as could join her. She explained the day’s events, including the death of the mother, the two year-old girl who was left behind, and even the detail of losing the last hot water bottle. Just then,
Ruth, a ten year-old orphan girl, blurted out, “Please, God, send us a hot water bottle! It will be no good tomorrow, so please send it this afternoon!” Ruth then concluded her prayer by saying, “And while You’re at it, would You please send a dolly for the little girl, so she’ll know You really love her?”
Dr. Helen recounts her feelings at that moment.
“As often with children’s prayers, I was put on the spot.
Could I honestly say, ‘Amen?’ I just did not believe that God could do this. Oh, yes, I know He can do everything; the Bible says so, but there are limits, aren't there? The only way God could answer this particular prayer would be by sending a parcel from the homeland. I had been in Africa for almost four years at that time, and I had never, ever received a parcel from home. Anyway, if anyone did send a parcel, who would put in a hot water bottle? I lived on the equator!”
Halfway through the afternoon, while teaching in the nurses’ training school, Dr. Helen received a message that there was a car at her house. By the time she returned home, the car was gone. There on the veranda, sat a large, twenty-two-pound parcel. Seeing that the box was too heavy to move alone, she sent for the orphanage children to help. Together they pulled off the string, carefully undoing each knot. Excitement mounted as some thirty pairs of eyes were focused on this large cardboard box.
From the top, Dr. Helen lifted out brightly-colored, knitted jerseys, much to the excitement of the children. Next came knitted bandages for the leprosy patients, followed by a box of mixed raisins. Reaching in again, Dr. Roseveare gasped,
“Could it be?” She then pulled out a brand new hot water bottle! Even though she didn’t pray for it, and really doubted it would come, God had shown Himself faithful. But there was more.
Ruth, who was sitting in the front row, rushed forward and cried out, “If God has sent the bottle, He must have sent the dolly, too!” Rummaging down to the bottom of the box, she pulled out the small, beautifully dressed dolly. Her eyes were shining with not one hint of doubt! Ruth then asked,
“Can we go over and give this dolly to that little girl, so she’ll know that Jesus really loves her?"
The miracle wasn’t just that they received the items Ruth so boldly prayed for, but more the timing. You see, that parcel had been packed up by some members of Dr. Helen’s Sunday school class and mailed five months prior! Along with the usual medical supplies and clothing, the leader of the class heard and obeyed God’s prompting to send a hot water bottle—to the equator. As well, one of the girls threw in a dolly for a child in the same package. All of this to be the answer of an unwavering, faith-believing ten year-old girl who prayed, five months later, “Bring it this afternoon!”
No matter what you’re facing today, don’t give up hope.
Your “hot water bottle” is on its way!

## Day 16: “You Are What You Eat”

“All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, thoroughly equipped for every good work.”

In 2002, two young girls and their parents filed a federal class action lawsuit against McDonald’s Corporation. Their claim? Eating a consistent diet of Happy Meals, Big Macs, French fries, and shakes led to their morbid obesity. Somehow, in their minds, McDonald’s was responsible for their condition.
Inspired by these events, independent film maker,
Morgan Spurlock, produced, starred in, and released the curious American documentary, Super Size Me, in 2004.
The premise was simple: Over a thirty-day period, Spurlock exclusively ate nothing but food from McDonald’s. Three meals a day, every day, for thirty days. His unscientific experiment was to document the changes to his physical body over this time period.
At the beginning, Spurlock was in better than average

2 Timothy 3:16-17 physical shape; however, things changed drastically. By eating upwards of 5,000 calories a day for thirty days, he gained twenty-five pounds, suffered severe liver issues, experienced a major spike in his cholesterol level, and watched his blood pressure balloon to 150/110. Coupled with his physical issues, Spurlock also reported mood swings, sexual dysfunction, and heart palpitations. In the end, it took over a year for Spurlock to recover.
While we all may love a McDonald’s fix from time to time, I don’t think a class action lawsuit is required to confirm the obvious: If all you eat is fat, greasy food, you’re going to end up being a fat, greasy person—no matter how many toys are in those little happy boxes! Your mom and your fifth grade teacher were right: You are what you eat—naturally and spiritually.
Just like your natural diet, what you feed your spirit, mind, and heart eventually becomes part of who you are. A constant stream of good, healthy spiritual food will cause your spirit man to grow strong. Consequently, polluting your mind and spirit with garbage will result in a spiritual and emotional breakdown.
My mom’s motto has always been, “Buy a Bible, read it, and underline it.” She never understood how people could come to church without their Bible. To her, it was like going to a baseball game without a bat. (For me, it’s like going to the mall without a debit card!)
Mom’s love for God’s Word came from my grandma, as she taught us all by example. I remember seeing Grandma sitting in her recliner “counting chapters.” Even though she couldn’t read well, Grandma loved the Word so much that she would set it on her lap and count the chapters. Her thought was, “If I can just hold it, maybe it will soak through my skin!”
I love what the prophet, Jeremiah, wrote while in a conversation with God:
“When your words showed up, I ate them—swallowed them whole.”
Jeremiah 15:16 (MSG)
Only by “eating right”—taking God’s Word into our hearts and lives—can we be transformed and grow spiritually.
In today’s super-electronic world, we are so tempted
(and foolish) to begin our day with a text, a Tweet, reading a blog, or seeing who has “Liked” our latest Facebook post.
Then when we finally get around to reading God’s Word, we wonder why we can’t absorb it into our spirits.
The Word of God is so much more than an instruction manual or history book; it’s the mind of Christ. And, if you’re like me, it’s probably right on your nightstand, coffee table, or bookshelf. Let it be the first thing you digest into your spirit every morning. Allow the Word to be the filter for everything else that enters your spirit and mind throughout the day. It will make an incredible difference!
Snack on God’s Word throughout the entire day. In the day and age we live, we can access the Word 24/7—in our cars, on our phones, computers, iPads, etc. The table is constantly spread; we just have to come and eat.
While you’re teaching your children to eat their vegetables and cut down on their sugar, be sure to monitor their spiritual diet, as well. Teach them to have conversations with God (a.k.a. prayer) daily. Teach them to learn what it is to have the mind of Christ. Teach them to eat the Word of God daily. Make it mandatory reading in your home! You cannot metabolize the Word for your children; they must learn to eat this Book on their own. It will change their world and they will soon come to understand the life-changing lesson: You are what you eat!

## Day 17: Full Access

“But Jesus said, ‘Let the little children come to Me, and do not forbid them; for of such is the kingdom of heaven.’”
Matthew 19:14
S o many Christians live fragmented lives, divided into many separate parts. They have their work life, home life, social life, and then their church life. While they include God in some areas, He’s not welcomed in every part.
Thankfully, I wasn’t raised like that.
Growing up, my family lived in a parsonage, which literally sat on the steps of the church my grandfather pastored. The best gift my parents and grandparents ever gave me was the fact that God was involved in every part of our life. Actually, He was our life! When we had a need, we prayed. When the need was provided, we thanked God for it. If someone was sick, we prayed. When God healed them, we rejoiced. For me, God wasn’t just some cosmic being floating around in space somewhere; He was—and still is to this day—my living, personal, loving, Heavenly
Father.
I’m not someone “special” because I know God in this way. From the beginning of Creation, God has always desired relationship with man. It’s the striking contrast which differentiates Him from the created gods of men. Not only did God create you, but He also desires a personal, intimate relationship with you. How marvelous is that? Just to think that the Creator of the entire universe desires to know us and us to know Him is nothing short of amazing.
Let's take this thought a step further. We aren’t the ones who initiate our relationship with God; it’s His pursuit. God made us not only to desire relationships with other human beings, but also with the capacity to know Him. That’s right.
The Almighty God, who has no needs and is self-sustaining, wants to know us personally and us to know Him.
The fact that God knows you isn’t a surprise; He made you! He knows every cell in your body. He knows every thought and every word you say before you say it. (See Psalms 139:4.) By His loving and great power, He holds your life together. (See Colossians 1:17; Hebrews 1:3.) He even knows you by name!
Developing a personal, loving relationship with God in our own life is vitally important, but it’s also only the beginning. The next step is to show our children, just like my grandparents and parents showed me, how to have a personal relationship with God. This is done through prayer, reading His Word, and hearing and obeying His voice, among other things.
One of the most valuable lessons to teach our children is how God is concerned about every area of their lives—their relationships, school work, dreams, goals, fears, insecurities, etc. (See Psalms 138:8.) Instead of teaching our children to compartmentalize God, let’s show them how to give Him full access—the good, the bad, and the challenged.
He’s waiting on it!

## Day 18: Amusement Park

Don’t you love taking your kids to the playground?
To watch their faces as they run and play is priceless. Of course, they soon outgrow the (free)
playground and graduate into (expensive) amusement parks! Experiencing the amusement park is fun... that is, until you have to live in one.
When you think about it, sometimes our lives can be like an amusement park, minus the amusement. For example:

Rollercoasters. Some days up, some days down.
You go up really slow and then drop really fast. I need Dramamine to ride the real ones, and a good dose of the Holy Ghost to ride the rollercoaster of life!
“... Be strong, vigorous, and very courageous. Be not afraid, neither be dismayed, for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go.”

Joshua 1:9 (AMPC)

Merry-go-round. Sometimes life can be a huge merry-go-round. Around and around you go...
seeing the same people... encountering the same situations... paying the same bills...
raising the same kids... going to the same job, etc. It makes me dizzy just thinking about it.

Bumper cars. This seems to be me on most days! You get up and bump into your husband, your children, your boss, you co-workers, your sister, etc.
The good news is this: You don’t have to live in the amusement park forever. Times change. Seasons change.
Situations change. Things progress and do get better.
How do you get off the rollercoaster? By counting it all joy, no matter if you’re up or down. (See James 1:2.) The slow, uphill battle you might be facing won’t last forever.
God has an answer and a solution. You’ll make it. Never be too caught up in the emotion of the bad times or good times. Whenever you hit a bump, you can either close your eyes or throw up your hands, scream, and enjoy the ride!
How about the merry-go-round, “same ‘ol thing” life?
Let’s face it, life can become very mundane and boring—if you let it. The problem with living on the merry-go-round is that you miss a lot of great scenery. Sometimes you just have to mix it up a little and change some things. Change your hair style/color. Change your outlook on life. Change your attitude. Change the way you address your kids and husband in the morning. Eat outside (if you can) once a week. Surprise your kids with their favorite snack or meal after school—even if it is McDonald’s. Even better, surprise your husband one night! Change is good.
And those bumper cars. Ride them too long and you’ll get whiplash! It’s funny how some days are bump days and some days are glory days. Your week could very well be:
bump, bump, glory, glory, bump, bump, glory, glory, glory, glory, bump, bump.
Bottom line, life is a process. Embrace it, and don’t grow weary.
No matter what “ride” we may be on, the right Godly attitude, even in the midst of chaos, can positively affect our lives and the lives of our families. With the right attitude, the sky is the limit. With the wrong one, we stay in the amusement park.
No matter what ride life throws at you, always remember you’ve got a great eternity ahead of you! You’re saved and on your way to the greatest place ever: Heaven.

## Day 19: Blink

It’s the first day of kindergarten. One hand holds his cartoon-emblazoned lunchbox, the other squeezes yours as he walks into the classroom for the very first time. As you
“Teach us to number our days, so that we may truly live and achieve wisdom.”
Psalm 90:12 (VOICE)

It’s one of the happiest days of your life—the day you brought your newborn home. The world seemed to stop, at least for a moment. It wasn’t long before you fell into a daily routine with the beautiful new addition to your family. The next thing you know...
Your newborn is suddenly rolling over and crawling all over the house.
They are walking and jabbering.
walk away, he waves a teary goodbye. The school journey has now officially started.
BLINK.
Eighth grade—gone are the days of cartoon lunchboxes and teary-eyed send offs. Now he hopes no one sees you dropping him off at the front of the school. How embarrassing! It won’t be long until...
BLINK.
“Mom, can I have the car keys?”
BLINK.
“Mom, can you meet me at Wal-Mart? I need stuff for my dorm room!”
BLINK.
“Mom, I want you to meet a girl. I think she might be the one!”
I don’t know about you, but I’ve blinked. In years past, other moms warned me about the “blink twice and they’ll be grown up” thing. “Enjoy every moment while they’re little,”
they would say. But I didn’t always heed their advice. How is it even possible to live through the “blinks” of life? One way:
You slow down!
Slow down long enough to laugh, relax, listen, and ask questions. Slow down long enough to read a story, play a game, or sit down for a meal around the table. Slow down long enough to journal their first words and first haircuts.
Slow down long enough to look out the window as they swing and play in the yard with their friends.
Take time to put your agenda on hold long enough to notice their little personalities emerging. Slip into their rooms at night, watch them breathe as they sleep, and thank God for the miracle of life He’s allowed you to participate in.
Slow down long enough to pray for your children. Pray that they find the path God pre-planned for them before the beginning of time. Pray that they serve Him with their whole heart. Pray that no evil, harm, plagues, or calamities ever come near them in their “just a blink away” futures.
Slow down.
I’m a testimony of the blink. It truly feels like I blinked twice and our two children, Jason and Larissa, grew up. Now they’ve started the “blinking” process of their own with our grandbabies Braden, Rylee, Gabriel, and Abrianna. Once again, I’m amazed at how fast time is moving as I watch these precious babies change every day.
In her book, 100 Ways to Build Self-Esteem and Teach Values, author Diane Loomans wrote a beautiful segment entitled, “If I Had My Child to Raise Over Again.” She said:
If I had my child to raise all over again,
I’d fingerpaint more, and point the finger less.
I’d do less correcting, and more connecting.
I’d take my eyes off my watch, and watch with my eyes.
I would care to know less, and know to care more.
I’d take more hikes and fly more kites.
I’d stop playing serious, and seriously play.
I’d run through more fields, and gaze at more stars.
I’d do more hugging, and less tugging.
I would be firm less often, and affirm much more.
I’d build self-esteem first, and the house later.
I’d teach less about the love of power, and more about the power of love.
It matters not whether my child is big or small From this day forth, I’ll cherish it all.
We really do live in a blink. It’s true, they really do grow up fast. Don’t miss a moment of it!

## Day 20: “Wah, Wah, Wah”

“Know this, my beloved brothers: let every person be quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger,”
James 1:9 (ESV)

Have you ever met a mom who knew more about The Real Housewives of Orange County than they did their own children? Trust me, there’s always something going on with our kids! It’s our job to dig it out.
There are several issues most children find very difficult to talk about—things like bullying, sex, relationships, school pressure, college, etc. The way to start making inroads into these and other issues is by simple communication. But, there’s a part of communication many parents never learn: the art of listening.
As moms, part of our nature is to be the “fixer” of all our children’s problems. It seems like no matter what they’re facing, we always have an answer, a fix, or a solution. The problem is this:
Sometimes they don’t need our answer, our fix, or our solution. Sometimes they simply need a listening ear.
I can’t count the number of times that, while in a conversation with one of my kids, I jumped to the end and offered my “Supermom” problem-solving advice before they even finished telling me the problem! While I thought I was helping, I was actually hindering our future conversations.
Something had to change, and that something was me.
My husband said something one day that struck a chord with me. He said, “God gave us two ears and one mouth.
That means we should listen twice as much as we talk.”
While I’m not sure this was a direct “word from the Lord,” it definitely arrested my heart to an eye-opening truth: For me to know what’s happening in my children’s lives, I needed to listen twice as much as I spoke. The outcome was amazing.
When I started letting them talk more, it was incredible how many times they found their own solutions just by talking it out. I began to ask questions like, “So, how do you think you should handle that?” “What does God’s Word say about it?” and “How does that make you feel?” These openended questions provided an avenue for more in-depth conversation and assured my kids I was truly listening, not just wanting to offer a solution.
One of the greatest lessons we can learn when it comes to communicating with our kids is the difference between hearing and listening. Hearing is really a no-brainer, but listening—truly catching the heart and spirit of what is being said—now, that’s an entirely different thing. Many times when we “listen” to our kids, all we hear is Charlie Brown’s school teacher: “Wah, wah, wah.” But, when we truly listen, we hear more than what’s being spoken. Oftentimes, the things our kids don’t say speak louder than the things they do say. When we really listen, we hear both.
Listening conveys the message, “You’re important to me and what you’re saying matters.” It also provides our children the ability to think for themselves and the confidence to work things out on their own. It’s amazing when we begin to listen twice as much as we speak; it moves our kids to speak twice as much as they normally would.
If you want them to speak, then learn the art of listening—real listening.

## Day 21: Everyday Living

“Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do not be frightened, and do not be dismayed, for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go.”
Joshua 1:9 (ESV)

There’s nothing like involving God in your everyday family life. It was the only life I knew as a child and when I got married, my husband and I determined to continue that practice in our own family. Does that mean we walk around quoting scriptures, singing worship songs, and praying all day? Of course not. What it means is that every single day, whether it’s by the decisions we make, the victories we experience, or the struggles we face, God is the center of our lives.
Not too long ago, our family went through a very difficult ministry experience which not only affected my husband and me, but our children, as well. As we have frequently done over the years, we called a “family meeting” to come together and discuss the issue. During this meeting, each member of our family began to describe the adverse spiritual and emotional affects caused by this disappointment from those we thought were our friends and co-laborers in Christ. I couldn’t believe all the hurt and heartache that poured from each of their mouths. It had taken a greater toll on our family than I had anticipated, but we knew there was an answer.
After we all shared our feelings, my husband directed our attention to the one place that would heal all our wounds—the Word of God. He specifically read what the Bible says concerning dealing with the pain and disappointment we all felt. Then, he gave us the directive: “We must forgive them and let it go.” Afterwards, we prayed and took communion together. What started out to be a night of pain and hurt, ended up being a powerful time in the sweet presence of God. We knew God was in control, as we felt Him performing His perfect work in all of us together.
Here’s the good news: You don’t have to wait until a crisis hits your family before you involve God in your daily affairs!
In fact, because we had made it a priority to include God in our everyday lives from the start, we knew exactly what to do when this difficult situation arose.
So, how do you bring God into your family’s everyday life? Actually, it’s easier than you might think. A great way to start is by simply asking your kids at the end of their day,
“How did you experience Jesus today?” Now if this is something new for you and your family, they might look at you like you should be hauled off to the funny farm! That’s okay. Everybody has to start somewhere.
Each day, encourage your children to think about how they can experience Jesus in a real way. Encourage them to talk about it around the dinner table. A great follow-up question might be, “So, how could you have involved God in your day today?” This will get them thinking beyond the normal boundaries of things they experience. Also, it begins to build the thought pattern that Jesus is interested in them and desires to be actively involved in every aspect of their lives.
Don’t be afraid to include God in your everyday family problems and decisions, too. Whenever decisions must be made, encourage everyone to pray about it and then report back together. If you let God lead, you’ll be amazed at how many times He’ll tell everyone in the family the same thing, which then makes the decision very easy. This will encourage your children to get into the habit of taking their own problems/decisions to the Lord.
It doesn’t matter if you’re married or if you’re a single mom; you can teach your kids how to involve God in their day-to-day lives and recognize that His presence is with them at all times. While it’s good for them to know they can always call on Jesus in times of trouble, it’s even more powerful to realize He’s there all day, all the time, and is ready to be involved in their everyday living.

## Day 22: Take a Stand

“... And after you have done everything, to stand.”
Ephesians 6:13b

Did you ever think there would come a day where just sending your kids to school would be so scary? I never thought we’d come to that day, but the reality is, we have. Issues like peer pressure, insecurity, fear, bullying, and low self-esteem bombard our children every day. Even more so, they are now faced with the with outside fear of an armed person walking into their school. But, there is an antidote.
As moms, one of our greatest responsibilities is to teach our kids how to take a stand for what they believe.
A few of those areas are:

Take a stand for Christ. Our kids need to know they can—and should—take a stand for their faith in Christ. This isn’t done by carrying around a five-inch-thick King James Version Bible to school, wearing a WWJD t-shirt twice a week, or walking down the halls quoting scripture all day. The best way for them to take a stand for Christ is through their own behavior—not just the things they say, but the things they do.
They can take a stand for Christ in more practical ways, such as showing the love of God to their classmates, friends, and most importantly, to those who aren’t the most popular kids in school. Being the very best student they can be is also a great way to share their witness.
Always remind your children that Jesus has called us to be salt and light (Matthew 5:13).
Salt preserves and light penetrates. Most of all, children need to be assured—and reassured, sometimes many times over—they can be proud of being a Christ-follower.

Take a stand in faith. Earlier I told you how I grew up in a praying family, where we prayed for everything, regardless how big or how small. I was taught to pray and believe God for the answer. This practice I started as a young child has grown to be such a powerful force in my life and has produced an even more powerful spiritual characteristic: faith.
Children understand faith on their level.
While believing God for next month’s mortgage payment might be out of their faith realm (even though I’ve seen some kids pray and God provide), they might be more confident asking God for something closer to home.
I have a friend whose husband died very prematurely, and her seven year-old son was very lonely. After a few months of being without his dad, this boy began to pray and ask God for another companion—a puppy. And not just any puppy... a very specific breed. Within a few months, a family member called and said they had a puppy who needed a home. It was the exact breed and color this little boy had believed God for! God showed Himself faithful to that little boy exactly at the level of his faith. It’s so important to teach our children how to stand in faith.

Take a stand in confidence. There’s never been a time when our children are more attacked concerning their self-esteem than today. And, there’s nothing quite as heartbreaking as watching our children battle through such issues. This is when a diet of the Word of God, especially the scriptures that tell them who they are in Christ, is so needed.
Much like faith, self-confidence grows. Remember David in the Bible? Here’s a teenager who’s been anointed by Samuel as Israel’s next king. Yet, his own father didn’t even bother to bring him in with the rest of his brothers to be considered for the position. Somewhere along the line David must have felt the rejection, but that didn’t stop his mission. Later in life, David confidently defeated the king-of-all-bullies, Goliath. But, he didn’t start at that level. God had already built David’s confidence by empowering him to kill a lion and a bear.
Knowing that confidence grows, encourage your children to stand confident even in the midst of their greatest challenges.
Teaching our children how to stand for Christ, stand in faith, and stand in confidence are keys to their spiritual development. These not only provide a way for them to live for God in front of their peers, but they also give God the opportunity to show off on their behalf. The more victories under their belt, the more their faith will grow. Then, when it’s time to face the “Goliaths” of life, they’ll be ready, knowing that Jesus is with them.

## Day 23: Traditions

“So then, brethren, stand firm and hold fast to the traditions and instructions which you were taught by us, whether by our word of mouth or by letter.”
2 Thessalonians 2:15 (AMPC)

Have you ever heard someone say, “Out with the old, in with the new!”? Even though there is some truth to this statement, not every “old” tradition needs to be thrown out. Truth be told, traditions offer numerous benefits: They can strengthen your family bonds and enrich the life you share together, create long-lasting memories, and contribute to your children’s well-being— all very positive results.
Traditions are behaviors and actions, which you engage in over and over again. They’re regular rituals you perform at the same time and/or in the same way. Family traditions are great, as they allow your children to learn about your family’s culture and religious history. In short, traditions give your family an identity, as they connect the past generations’ important values and hand them down to the present generations.
One thing I did to capture an important part of my family’s tradition was to make a cookbook featuring my grandmother’s recipes. (My husband often thanks me for this!) On one page is the recipe I remember my grandmother preparing. The opposite page has a picture of me and my grandparents in some stage of our lives, along with a story that correlates to the recipe. This book is a treasure to me.
So much so, I made a copy for my mom, my daughter, and my son. Within this cookbook lie the stories and traditions we have established, ones I want to see continue in my children and grandchildren.
A very special family tradition (one of my favorites, actually) we have continued throughout the years takes place during my two most favorite times of the year—
Thanksgiving and Christmas.
When I was growing up, my grandmother always cooked everyone their favorite dessert during these times. It didn’t matter how many different desserts were requested, she cooked them all from scratch. Today, I do it just like Granny Taylor, but I go one step further. During our Thanksgiving and Christmas meals, I prepare everyone in my family one of their own favorite dishes—a dessert, casserole, meat dish, etc. It might not sound like much, but believe me, when the holiday season comes rolling around, you’d better believe my kids and husband are saying, “I can’t wait for mom to fix
___!” I am determined to hang on to those established traditions that were handed down to me.
If your family has never established traditions, getting started is easy. Here are few suggestions:

Take your family on a weekend vacation either the same time or the same place every year. (I know a family who has camped in the same national park every year for fifty-four straight years!)

Start sponsoring a needy family for Christmas.
For every gift you buy your family, buy another for the other family, and then go deliver them together.

Have a certain food on a certain night of the week, i.e., Tuesday is homemade pizza night, Wednesday is spaghetti night, etc.

Do family devotions around the dinner table.

Read the Christmas story together every Christmas before opening gifts.

Celebrate New Year’s Eve together in a special and unique way.

Go on a yearly mission trip with all or some of your family.

Assemble a 2,000-piece puzzle every year—and pray for patience!

Have a game night once a week... or once a month.
These are just a few simple suggestions to get you started. The possibilities are endless. Whatever you find to do, create special things or have special occasions that your kids will never forget and can pass along for generations to come.

## Day 24: Speak Life

“Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and they who indulge in it shall eat the fruit of it [for death or life].”
Proverbs 18:21 (AMPC)

Do you realize that women, on average, speak between 15,000 and 20,000 words a day?
(Compare that to about 7,000 for men!) That’s a whole lot of nouns, verbs, syllables, sentences, and questions coming out of our mouths every day. What’s more important than the number of words is the quality of words that roll off our tongue.
Words are one of the most powerful tools ever created. They’re the mechanism in which we communicate our thoughts and feelings. They can build up or they can destroy. They can bring hope or despair, life or death, peace or destruction. Words affect every area of our lives—our personal life, our family, our finances, our relationships, etc. Every day, we make a choice: Will we speak life or speak death?
One day I received a phone call from a friend—or, at least,
I thought he was a friend. For practically the entire conversation, he berated me and said negative things about both me and my husband. By the time I hung up the phone, I was so discouraged I couldn’t even think straight or function. So,
I did what most any woman would do: I went out to the front porch, sat down, and cried my eyes out.
It was amazing how, in just a few minutes of conversation, my world could be so turned upside down. This man’s words took away my hope and stole my joy, to the point where I even began to doubt God’s plan for my life—all because of someone’s voice!
That’s the power of words.
Thankfully, a few hours after that devastating call, someone else who was divinely sent by God called to encourage me. Instead of destroying my confidence, he began to prophecy over my me and my husband, speaking powerful words that reconfirmed things God had already spoken to our hearts. His words did the exact opposite of the other man’s words; they put fresh hope back into this girl who was about to collapse.
The psalmist, David, prayed and asked God to put a guard at the door of his mouth (Psalm 141:3). That’s exactly what we need. We need God to set a guard at the door of our mouth to cause us to speak words of life to every person, in every situation.
I once heard of a lady whose husband was a drunk. He could never hold down a job, so he drank all day long. Every day this lady would see her husband sprawled out on the couch, trying to recover from his latest binge. Whenever she was asked about him, she always said, “Oh, he’s nothing but a low down, sorry drunk. All he does is drink all day. He doesn’t do anything to provide for us.” While accurately describing her husband, her words were doing something else—creating her future. She was living exactly what she was saying.
Nothing was changing.
It wasn’t long before the Lord began to deal with her concerning the power of life and death in her tongue. Soon after, she walked over to her husband (who was passed out in yet another stupor) and said, “I call out of you what God has designed you to be. God has called you to be the man of this house and to be faithful to me and our family.” After she began to call these things out, guess what happened? Her husband got off the couch, decided to give his life to Christ, and turned his life completely over to God.
When you confess God’s Word, it works!
Maybe this story describes you. True, you may have a
“no good, low down, sorry drunk” for a husband or maybe your children are participating in behavior that isn’t right for them. Maybe your marriage isn’t what it used to be. Believe me, I know how tempting it is to call things as you see them, but there is a better way.
Instead of speaking what you see, begin speaking what you want to see. Call those gifts and callings, that are placed in your family members by God, into existence. Let the psalmist’s prayer be your prayer:
“Lord, let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in your sight.”
Psalms 19:14
This isn’t being “super spiritual,” but rather it’s simply a Biblical principle to put into action.
Let’s see, 20,000 words a day? That’s 20,000 opportunities to speak life!

## Day 25: Queen of the Castle

“The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force,”
Matthew 11:12

I love castles! I’m not sure if it’s because I read so many fairytale stories growing up, or because I was enchanted with Cinderella as a child. Truth be known, it’s probably a combination of both. Whatever the case, my love for castles led me to do a little research.
While drawbridges, motes, and watchtowers portray castles as amazing fortresses from the outside, inside each castle was a very lively place. A castle “open house” would show kitchens, kennels, chapels, stables, orchards, and even fishponds. Some castles are so large, they actually house entire villages within their walls! But, that’s not all.
Something else is built into every castle which I found very intriguing.
Built inside these mighty fortresses is a room called
“the keep.” Today we call them “safe rooms.” The keep was designed as a safe shelter for the women and children in the event of an attack. Food was stored on the first level, the servants’ quarters were on the second level, and the third and fourth levels were reserved for the lords of the house.
Another interesting fact concerns the lady of the castle.
Her responsibility was to run the entire estate. She would decide what food was to be served, what supplies were to be purchased, what crops were to be planted and harvested, how each crop would be distributed, the areas to be cleaned, and what clothes needed to be made or mended.
And, if the lord wasn’t in residence, she would often preside and rule on cases presented in the manor court. Her hands were rarely idle. In fact, in the absence of her husband, she would take on a military role to protect her castle if need be.
This lady wasn’t afraid and was prepared to fight for her family.
I would’ve never guessed that the lady of castle would be so busy and carry so much responsibility. In short, she was a cross between Martha Stewart, Estee Lauder, Judge Judy, and Wonder Woman! Actually, she was a Proverbs 31 woman personified—the queen of her castle.
The most amazing fact about my love for castles is this:
I’ve never been in one! However, I live in one—not a physical castle, but the Nordin estate, also called, “our home.”
My husband has always said this concerning our family,
“Nobody from this house goes to hell. Everybody from this house goes to Heaven. Our family is going to live for the Lord and we are going to Heaven together.” I love this confession and have believed it all the years we’ve been married. But let me tell you, a bold stance like this doesn’t come without a fight from the enemy.
As women, we are the “keepers of our castle.” According to Miriam-Webster’s Dictionary, to “keep” means to watch over, defend, maintain, preserve, and protect. Not only do we prepare our home as a safe haven of peace, but there are also times where we must stand in the gap, make up the hedge, and fight for our families—not physically, but spiritually. It’s spiritual warfare.
You can believe the devil is fighting for your home, your marriage, and your children. There might come a time where you have to drop your Coach purse and take on the role of a spiritual militant! When you need to pray, pray. When you need to bombard Heaven, bombard Heaven. When you need to fast, fast. Your family could be hanging in the balance.
We are the keepers of our homes and are to maintain it, preserve it, protect it, defend it, watch over it, manage it, and make it a safe place. Our home needs to be a cocoon of safety—“the keep,” if you will, where our families are protected against today’s world.

## Day 26: Pull Up a Chair

In 2006, Time magazine published a very interesting article entitled, “The Magic of the Family Meal.” Here’s a short excerpt which really caught my attention:
“Talk is the glue of family life and if family members don’t talk to each other, the bonds between them grow weaker. Eating together is often the only opportunity for the family to talk, share experiences, and have family time. Once the central event on a family’s social calendar, the humble family meal, is fastly becoming a thing of the past, pushed off the agenda by overtime, chores, and pure fatigue.”
Isn’t that something? Talking with family members is the glue that holds the bonds of family relationships together. With this thought in mind, is it any wonder that family relationships are so strained and dysfunctional these days? Our American lifestyle has become a constant rush from one place to another, always busy doing something, always running here and there. For me, what used to be such a normal thing—sitting down at the dinner table with my parents and family—is now becoming abnormal in many homes across America.
There are many reasons why families are finding it more difficult to sit down together for a meal. Many of those reasons are legitimate, or at least they seem to be. But, it mostly comes down to a lack of priorities. Just as we schedule every other event and activity in our daily lives, we should also plan undisturbed family dinner “appointments” as many times per week as possible.
Recently, I read a very interesting psychological study concerning certain dynamics of the family meal. This study, performed over a ten-year span, produced two extremely fascinating findings:

“The table prevents destructive behaviors.
Research shows that frequent family dinners, five or more a week, are associated with lower rates of smoking, drinking, and illegal drug use in pre-teens and teenagers, also suicide and depression. When compared to families that eat together two or fewer times per week, even as older children’s schedules get more complicated, it is important to make an effort to eat meals together.”

“The table improves grades. Children do better in school when they eat more meals with their parents and their family. Teenagers who eat dinner together, four or more times per week, have higher academic performance compared with teenagers who eat with their families two or fewer times per week.”
Sharing a sit-down meal together can produce so many positive results. Along with the two already mentioned, it also establishes a powerful sense of identity, provides a great place to help ease and resolve day-to-day conflicts, and is one of the best venues for telling stories and making memories.
When I was growing up, owning a TV was considered a
“sin,” so dinnertime was very special to me. Today, years later, I vividly remember the things we discussed, the wisdom I gleaned, the memories we made, and the laughs we shared.
It’s time to bring the family back to the table. Whether dinner, breakfast, or lunch, plan as many times per week as possible to sit down together as a family. And, why not go one step further and declare it a “no-electronics zone”? No phones, no tablets, no games, no electronic devices—that includes you, too, Mom! Lead by example by removing the distractions. Center your attention on the main thing—your family.
Here’s one more finding from the ten-year study:
During the teenage years, the family meal time is a daily investment which pays some of the biggest dividends.
Even if your teenager acts like they’re too cool to sit down with Mom and Dad, be encouraged; it’s working!
So, pull up a chair, turn off the TV, put away the electronic devices, and start making some special memories.
One day, your kids will thank you!

## Day 27: Bows and Arrows

“Like a warrior’s fistful of arrows are the children of a vigorous youth. Oh, how blessed are you parents, with your quivers full of children! Your enemies don’t stand a chance against you; you’ll sweep them right off your doorstep.”
Psalms 127:4-5 (MSG)

A royal duke was hunting in the forest with his menat-arms and servant when he came across a tree painted with many archery targets. Inside each target was an arrow smack in the middle. The duke questioned, “Who is the fine archer? I must find him.”
After combing through the forest a few more miles, he came upon a small boy carrying a bow and arrow. The duke asked him, “Son, are you the one who is such a fine marksman?” The boy, afraid that he was in trouble, finally admitted that indeed he was the one who had shot the arrows. The duke asked, “You didn’t just walk up to those targets and hammer the arrows into the bullseye, did you?” “No, my lord. I shot them from 100 paces. I swear it by all I hold holy.” Astonished by his keen marksmanship, the duke replied, “That’s truly amazing. I hereby admit you into my service.” The boy thanked him profusely.
As he was leaving, the duke turned to ask one last question. “Son, tell me, how did you come to be such an outstanding shot?” “Well,” said the boy, “first I fire the arrow at the tree, and then I go paint the target around it!”
Now, that’s what I call a smart boy!
Do you know that we, as moms, are archers? While we might not show our skills by shooting arrows at targets painted on trees, our arrows represent a much higher value—the lives of our children. I love today’s scripture because it always reminds me of the incredible responsibility we carry as moms. Our lives are not just for us at this moment. We have been placed here by God to shape our future generations.
God has always been a generational God. All throughout the Old Testament, He’s referred to as “The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,” who you might already know were grandfather, father, and son. The same holds true today. The moment God saved you, He didn’t just save you, He also had His eye on generations to follow. Psalms 105:8 says it this way:
“He is [earnestly] mindful of His covenant and forever it is imprinted on His heart, the word which He commanded and established to a thousand generations.”
Psalms 105:8
God doesn’t see our children like we do—cute and cuddly bundles of joy. He views them as weapons—arrows of deliverance just waiting to be launched. So, if our kids are the arrows, then guess who the bows are? You got it.
We are!
An arrow can’t fly on its own. It requires a bow to be launched in a specific direction. With that in mind, we need to constantly ask ourselves, “In what direction am I shooting my arrows?” The answer is quite simple:
Wherever we aim our lives is the same direction we shoot our arrows!
If our lives are projected towards alcoholism, divorce, immorality, sexual promiscuity, etc., that’s exactly where our arrows will land. On the other hand, if we aim at the things of God—righteousness, prayer, holiness, worship, etc.—we launch our arrows into a promising future.
Think of the impact we can have on the future of the world just by shooting the arrows we have in the right direction. If we want to change this world, we have to start making sure our lives are aimed in the right direction, so we can release the goodness of God in this earth...... One arrow at a time.

## Day 28: 86,400

“Look carefully then how you walk, not as unwise but as wise, making the best use of the time, because the days are evil. Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.”
Ephesians 5:15-17 (ESV)

Imagine, if you will, that you have a special bank account, in your name only, where every single day the bank credits you with $86,400—every single day!
Wouldn’t that be awesome?
But, there’s a catch.
It carries no balance over from day to day. That’s right.
Every evening, whatever you didn’t spend is deleted. Can you imagine what that would be like? What would you do?
I can tell you exactly what I’d do. I’d be instantly anointed to shop—and I wouldn’t stop until I had spent every last dime, every day!
Okay, out of dreamland and back to reality.
Obviously, this scenario is most likely not going to happen, at least as it relates to dollars. But guess what? It’s already happening, every single day, with another currency far more precious that money: TIME!
Your twenty-four-hour day is the bank and every night at midnight, you’re credited with 86,400 more seconds— another twenty-four hours. And at the end of each day, what you haven’t used wisely is written off as a bad investment.
There’s no carry over to the next day, no interest paid on what you saved, and no overdraft protection. Each day opens a brand new account—and brand new slate of another
86,400 seconds. Fail to use it, and you lose it.
For years, I’ve heard people say, “If I had more time I’d...,”
or things like, “I wish I had the time to do everything so-andso does.” Yet, they are all given the exact same amount, every day of the year.
The issue isn’t that we need more time; the issue is how we prioritize what’s been allotted to us.
When it comes to time, there’s no going back to yesterday and there’s no borrowing against it. You must live in the present, on today’s deposit. So, spend it wisely in order to get the most you can for your family. The clock is ticking.
There’s no time to waste!

## Day 29: The Buck Stops Here

“But let every person carefully scrutinize and examine and test his own conduct and his own work.”
Galatians 6:4 (AMPC)

Imagine for a moment two white screens in front of you. The first screen shows forty big, black dots. The second one has the same kind of dots, but 3,000 of them. Can you see it? Now, let’s see what they represent.
The screen with forty dots signifies the average number of hours your child will spend in church or with their youth/children’s pastor per year. The 3,000 big, black dots represent the average number of hours your child will spend with you in the same year. For every one hour they’re in or around church, they will spend seventy-five hours with you.
Wow!
Looking at these numbers, can you see where your child’s primary spiritual influence and growth comes from?
It’s not the church, the children’s program, or the youth group. It comes from you. Yet, so many parents who have their children in church (and thank God they do) want the pastoral staff to shoulder the responsibility for their children’s spiritual development. Now, don’t get me wrong.
Having your children in church and around the people and things of God is wonderful and more needed today than ever, but only a small percentage of their time is spent there.
The high majority of your child’s time, per year, is spent in school, around friends and teachers, and with you.
Having been in the ministry for practically all my life, it never ceases to amaze me how people are so quick to blame their pastor for the misfortunes in their own lives. We recently received a call from a pastor friend who told us about a conversation he had with one of his members. It’s not a conversation any pastor looks forward to. The member said, “My daughter’s getting a divorce. If you were a better pastor, she wouldn’t be going through what she’s going through right now.”
What?
Blaming this pastor for something that’s completely out of his control is crazy. Of course, the “blame game” isn’t anything new. It started at the very beginning with Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.
Remember when Eve ate the fruit God forbade them to?
The moment she did, sin entered into the world. It’s always amused me how God, who already knew what Eve had done, didn’t come looking for Eve, but instead He asked Adam why this happened. Adam was quick to throw Eve under the bus, saying, “The woman you gave me, she gave me of the fruit, and I ate,” (Genesis 3:8). Then God asked Eve to explain her actions. Following her husband’s lead, she answered, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate,” (Genesis 3:13).
Here we go: Adam blames Eve, Eve blames the serpent.
It seems the only two people in this scenario who are not blame shifting are God and the devil! Sadly, this pattern of behavior still continues today.
President Harry S. Truman, one of the most plain-spoken politicians of all time, always kept a sign with a short phrase on his desk. It simply said, “The buck stops here.” Truman used this as a constant reminder that he could no longer
“pass the buck,” but that he was the only person ultimately responsible for his decisions.
The same is true for parenting. The responsibility for our children’s upbringing—both naturally and spiritually—doesn’t rest with their teachers, friends, friend’s parents, Little League coaches, school guidance counselor, youth pastor, children’s pastor, or senior pastor. It lies in one place—with us!
Let me say again that there’s absolutely nothing wrong with having your children involved in a great church. As a matter of fact, they (as well as you) should be plugged into a good, life-giving church. It’s a vital part of their spiritual foundation. But the church and its staff, no matter how awesome they may be, are there to reinforce what you’ve already been speaking, teaching, and living in front of your kids. In the end, we carry the responsibility. President Truman was right.
The buck does stop here.

## Day 30: A Front Row Seat

“I remain confident of this: I will see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.”
Psalms 27:13

A few years ago, our church choir planned a trip to New York City. The opportunity to go on such a trip, to such an incredible city, was about more than I could stand. One of the highlights of the trip for me was attending Sunday services at the Brooklyn Tabernacle Church, home of the world-renowned Brooklyn Tabernacle Choir. Of course, we didn’t travel all that way to sit in the balcony. No sir, we arrived early and sat on the very front row! I was so excited! We didn’t miss a thing. Being an observant person by nature, I looked at every choir member, every staff member, all the band, and even the sound techs and stage hands. Needless to say, it was one of the most memorable trips, complete with front row seats!
You don’t have to travel to New York City—or anywhere else, for that matter—to have some of the best front row seats in the world. That’s right. Some of the best things you will ever see are right in front of your eyes... in your very own home.
There are two powerful influences on this planet: the church and the home. They both exist because God initiated them to demonstrate His plan of redemption and restoration and to build His Kingdom in the hearts of our sons and daughters. The best thing about this is that we, as moms, have the opportunity to watch God do His work in their lives right in front of our eyes.
We have a front-row seat!
Guess who God uses to reveal His goodness, His faithfulness, and His redemption to your kids? You! That’s right! Not only do you get to watch, but you’re also God’s best tool when it comes to leading your children into His nature. With that said, let me debunk something that keeps many moms from taking their rightful, spiritual place in their kid’s lives. Here it is:
Never buy into the myth that you need to become the “perfect parent” before God can use you in your children’s lives.
I’m here to tell you, that’s a lie from the devil! If we all had to be the perfect parent, none of us would ever have a chance! Instead of believing this lie, let’s learn to cooperate with whatever God desires to do in our hearts When we do, our children will have a front-row seat to His grace and His goodness in action!
If you’re like me, one of your greatest desires for your children is for them to see, firsthand, what God can do in their lives. He has so much in store for them. It’s God’s desire to work miracles for our kids, to heal their bodies, to deliver them from the attacks of the devil, and to keep them in His loving care all the days of their lives.
Whether it looks like it or not, you can believe that God is at work, right now, building a story of redemption and restoration through your family. Our children need to experience and know that even when we are faithless, God remains faithful!
Grab your popcorn and get ready for the show—God is showing Himself strong on your behalf and in the lives of your children. He’s ready. Are you? Take off the restraints and let Him do what He wants in your family. You better watch what you pray for, because God is in the “surprise”
and “suddenly” business! Your life and your family are in for the greatest ride of faith they could ever imagine—and you get to watch it all...... All from a front row seat!