The Word For The Wise
By Henry Brandt, PHD
And Kerry L. Skinner

I. PORTRAIT OF A BIBLICAL COUNSELOR
INTRO: The basic requirement for a biblical counselor is character. (All Scripture references will be from the NIV unless otherwise stated.) 2 Tim. 2:15 "Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a workman who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth. "

Character is not something you are born with, it is something that is developed through various sources: 
Instilled through family or origion.
Learned through educational processes.
Developed through professional responsibility.
Perfected through adversity.

Always remember, character is more important than academic training. The style of counseling will grow out of the Counselors character and attitude.

Definition of a Biblical Counselor
A biblical counselor will be referred to as any person who uses the Word of God as the foundation for sharing truth with a person who needs to "escape the corruption in the world caused by evil desires."

Personal Characteristic of a Biblical Counselor:
* A joyful, relaxed wholesome attitude toward life.
* A Spirit-filled person who looks to God for wisdom and discernment.
* One who loves to encounter God through studying His Word on a regular basis.
* One with a reputation for good judgment in interpersonal relations, marriage and family relations, finances, and helping people - based on biblical knowledge.
* One who loves to help others apply God's Word to life.


In this chapter we want to focus on four character Qualities of a Biblical Counselor
1. The Lord's servant does not quarrel.
2. The Lord's servant is gentle to everyone.
3. The Lord's servant is able to teach.
4. The Lord's servant gently instructs opponents.

I. THE LORD'S SERVANT DOES NOT QUARREL!
A. The Lord's servant must pray for grace not to argue. As a Biblical Counselor a person must not allow himself to be drawn to a posture of argument or debate, because the principles of the Bible are non-debatable. 

When Biblical advice is brought into question by the counselee the natural reaction is to argue the point. In times like these the Biblical Counselor must state What the Word say's and allow it to stand on it's own. In such cases the Biblical Counselor must pray for wisdom and grace not to argue. 

In addition, the Counselor must remember he is a presenter of the Word, not a defender of the Word.

B. The Biblical Counselor must build a relationship with Christ by studying His Word and practicing the principles that he finds there. 

A relationship with Christ will be impossible without careful study of his Word. If you want to build a relationship with someone you must be willing to spend the time necessary to get to know them.  

The Word is the revelation of Jesus Christ. The Word reveals him! His thoughts, his desires, his way's, his attributes, his characteristics, etc...
Once the Biblical Counselor gets to know Christ through his word, he must be willing to practice the principles he has learned. The life of the Biblical Counselor must be consistent with the advice he is giving!

C. The Biblical Counselor must learn the lesson of contentment. The Apostle Paul said,   "I have learned in whatever state I am, to be content."

Being content is not a normal emotion, but it is a Scriptural principle. The Biblical Counselor understands that his way's and times are in the hand of the Lord, and that God is working all things for his good! For those who know and believe this truth contentment is possible in all situations.

II. THE LORD'S SERVANT IS GENTLE TO EVERYONE!
A. The Biblical Counselor quietly handles pressure.

Make no mistake about it, the Lord's servant will be under pressure from time to time.  The Biblical Counselor will often times feel the pressure to:
Do something to meet the approval of the client. 
Give advice from personal experience rather than from the Word.
Give in to the wishes or demands of the client.

B. The Biblical Counselor continues to "Grow in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ."

The Biblical Counselor will have an insatiable desire for more knowledge of the Word. He will also be careful to attempt to place what he has learned into practice in his life, as well as in the lives of those he counsels.

C. The Biblical Counselor is quick to repent, receive forgiveness, be cleansed and renewed. 

Those who use the Word of God as their source in counseling understand that they are no more perfect than the next person. Because of this the Biblical Counselor does not attempt to hide his own failures, but repents, receives forgiveness, and is cleansed and renewed!

III. THE LORD'S SERVANT IS ABLE TO TEACH!
A. The Biblical Counselor is sure about knowledge. For a person to be sure about knowledge, they must research it, test it, and practice it! Once these things have been done the Biblical Counselor is then qualified to teach that particular truth.

Being sure about Biblical knowledge brings the following results: 
* Can distinguish right from wrong.
* Has an abundance of faith, grace, and peace.
* Gives us everything we need for life and godliness.
* A way of escape from corruption in the world caused by evil desires.

For the Biblical counselor to do his job adequately as a teacher he must become a well of knowledge and wisdom!

B. The Biblical counselor must be fluent about knowledge. The principles of the Word of God must be more to the Biblical Counselor than head knowledge!

For the Biblical Counselor the Bible must come alive, and be a living book!

C. The Biblical counselor must be familiar with knowledge. You must know something or someone pretty well before you can truthfully say that I am familiar with this.

When you begin to become familiar with Biblical knowledge, it will begin to mold your character. Continuing character development is a hallmark of the true Biblical Counselor!

THE LORD'S SERVANT GENTLY INSTRUCTS OPPONENTS!
A. The Lord's servant gently instruct those who are struggling with the grace of God.

The Biblical Counselor should never attempt to force comfort on unwilling recipients. Always remember, experience and faith mean nothing to those who refuse to be corrected or comforted! The Biblical counselor must be gentle and informative, not rude and pushy!

B. The Lord's servant knows the importance of meeting with God on His terms.

In order to meet God on His terms the following things must happen:
* Personally experience the truth of the Bible.
* Believe the Bible is credible.
* Meet the conditions as portrayed in the Bible.

C. The Lord's servant knows the difference between relief and cleansing.

Diagnosis is tough! An accurate diagnosis, as unpopular as it may be, is what is needed to turn the situation around. 

Oftentimes the counselee will direct their sin at the counselor. The Job of the Biblical Counselor is to get the counselee headed in the right direction!

People can make adjustments apart from God that will make them feel more comfortable. They can learn to live comfortably with their sin by avoiding those circumstances that would stir them up. If they get out from under certain circumstances, their condition will not be evident.  It will be there, but it will be dormant.  EXAMPLE: If you have been under extreme pressure and the reason for the pressure was rebellion, you can make yourself feel better by changing your surroundings or circumstances. However, the pressure will return when you are asked to do something you do not want to do.  The cure for rebellion is to turn to God and allow him to cleanse your heart.

A great truth for the Biblical Counselor to remember is, I am not a mediator between the counselee and  God.  I cannot do their confessing, repenting, yielding, or surrendering for them.















The living Savior died to make it possible for us to find a source of peace for our own hearts and to give us goodwill toward all the people who have sinned against us.

Before Jesus ascended to heaven, He gave His disciples a twofold directive.
1) Repent and remission of sins should be preached in His name to all nations."  Luke 24:47
2) "Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the age."  Matt 28:20

What Is Sin?
There is no human remedy for sin.  Immediate supernatural help is available.

The Spirit-Filled Life
A biblical counselor needs to know how to lead the counselee into a Spirit-filled life.

Rom 3:20

Gal 5:16

How Must We Treat Sin?

Self Help
Human help will enable you to live with an manage a sinful heart.

Several methods of self-help can be beneficial:  Supervision and accountability, support groups, behavior modification, setting goals, a carefully administered drug program.

Relief from the effects of a sinful heart is available without giving God a thought.

Human relief is a massive barrier that interferes with our sense of need for a Savior.

God's Help
Bible verses point to God's help - the supernatural way - to change the sinful heart.

The Seriousness of Sin
Three ancient rules that would eliminate AIDS:
1) Avoid sexual immorality
2) Do not commit adultery
3) Whoever looks at a woman to lust for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.

The urge toward sexual immorality is , humanly speaking, all but unmanageable.

It is a sin against the living God.

Sin and its consequences deserve serious attention.

A Right To Sin?
Gratifying the sinful nature has spawned complex personal, marital, social, national, and international problems.  You are only a prayer away from originating the beginnings of a transformed life.

The Flesh vs. The Spirit
A battle already lost, lost in the first Adam, who was made a living soul, and died; but the last Adam, Jesus Christ, has already defeated sin and death and hell, and Satan himself!  Victory over the flesh is not to be attained - it is to be received.

If you walk in the Spirit, you can turn around and face your enemy.  God has already bruised the serpent's head!  To walk in the Spirit is to assume by faith the victory with which He credits you.  God will vindicate your assumption and make it real in your experience.

Nothing is more nauseating or pathetic than the flesh trying to be holy!  The flesh has a perverted bent for righteousness - but such righteousness as it may achieve is always self-righteousness; and self-conscious righteousness is always full of self-praise.  This produces the extrovert, who must always be noticed, recognized, consulted, and applauded.  On the other hand, when the flesh in pursuit of self-righteousness fails, instead of being filled with self-praise, it is filled with self-pity, and this produces the introvert.  A professional "case" for professional counselors!

Satan will seek to persuade you that "walking in the Spirit" is simply the consequence of your pious endeavor not to fulfill the "lusts of the flesh."  By subtly confusing the means for the end, he will rob you of what he knows to be your only possibility of victory.

You have been trying not to fulfill the lust of the flesh in order to walk in the Spirit.  You are fighting a battle already lost.  What God has said to you is this, "Walk in the Spirit" (in an attitude of total dependence upon Him, exposing everything to Him) "and you shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh."  You will then be enjoying through Him the victory that Christ has already won.

As you take every step in an attitude of total dependence upon the Lord Jesus Christ who indwells you by His Spirit, He celebrates in you the victory.  He has already won over sin and death and Satan.

Methods of Counseling
When a biblical counselor steps into the consulting room, he is Christ's ambassador, as though God were making His appeal through Him.  He proceeds by faith in God's Word.

Prov 3:5-6

Kerry replied that Katlyn's death did not cause their problems; it revealed them.  They had a sin problem.

Workbook:  The Heart of the Problem.

There is a problem in your heart, and, therefore, there is a problem in your home.  When you have peace in your heart, there is peace in your home.

Human Help but No Cure

The Holy Spirit's Role in Biblical Counseling
When the counselor, the counselees, and the Holy Spirit are in the room:
1) God has a purpose
2) His Holy Spirit takes the Word of God and speaks to both the counselor and the counselee.
3) Truth is revealed to both the counselor and counselee.
4) The result of the Truth being revealed is a changed life for both the counselor and counselee.
5) Both counselor and counselee are to obey what was revealed to them and are to walk in a continuing relationship with God.

The Biblical counselor enters the consulting room mindful of a biblical caution.  "He who answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame to him."  Prov 18:13
Biblical counseling is listening for a biblical principle being violated.  Continue listening until you get enough data to present your diagnosis based on their own data.

You need to hear enough that they feel you understand the situation.  Listen with compassion.  Help them bring out all the facts.  

They cannot deny their sin if the biblical principle fits the data.  Hold the mirror of God's standard before them.  Ask them what God is saying to them about this situation in the light of Scripture.  Bring them to the point of agreeing with the biblical principle.

Noah did not have a degree in architecture nor did he have a background in zoology.  Why would God choose Noah to build the ark and lead the people and animals to safety?  Think about it.  Noah did not even know what rain was.  What then qualified Noah?  The answer is found in Genesis 6:9.  "Noah walked with God."

The difference between sin-controlled living and Spirit-controlled living.

Catharsis
Ventilating is a similar word.  It means giving a counselee the opportunity to express their thoughts, feelings, and emotions - assisting them to clarify the same.

The secular conclusion:  The counselee is a victim of the past.

To lend a loving, sympathetic ear that enables a person to get these things "off the chest" is a source of great satisfaction to the counselor.  The benefit to the counselee is great, blessed relief.  It is as much a relief as a drug that deadens unbearable pain.  But it is relief, not healing.

The objective is to help the counselee clarify conflicts, thoughts, emotions, and goals without influencing the process.

Be clear about your objective.  You are listening to help the counselee decide whether choices made comply or deviate from biblical principles.  This process involves making judgments.  Your counselee may resist the process even though it was agreed upon.  Make judgments momentarily as you go along, comparing the story to biblical principles.

If you lack wisdom, you go into the presence of God and by faith believe that He is guiding you.

If you do anything for a counselee, it is to communicate your confidence in God and His Word, the Bible, to that person.

The response of the counselee to the past is the result of a sinful heart.  That is the greatest news a struggling counselee could receive.  It is only sin.  No need to struggle with the environment any more to find relief.  Now they deal only with God.  He will cleanse their heart from sin and fill it with the Spirit.

Facing the Problem

We must be careful not to consider relief from catharsis and the cleansing from sin as interchangeable.  The counselee may only want the relief without the cleansing.

The counselor should be reluctant to allow catharsis to go very far without clarifying whether the person is asking for relief or the fullness of the Spirit.

You cannot speed up the process.  You can only go as fast as they can go.

If you are interested in helping people, then you must be willing to see people disturbed.

Ways To Be A More Effective Counselor

The Counselor's Heart
Be sure your heart is right toward them.   Do they like you is not the question.  If your heart right toward them?  Is it catharsis, or comparison with biblical principles?

Our objective is to work ourselves out of a job with that particular person.

Praise is as hard to handle as criticism.

Do not be afraid of pointing out a weakness.

Self - Evaluation
Confer regularly among staff who teach, preach, or counsel, with evaluation in mind.  Let key people know what is going on in a particular case.

Keep your soul diligently.  You are the architect of your own misery.  Saturate your heart with the Word of God.  Practice it.

First Disciples, Then Counselors
How far can you take people?  As far as you have come.  You can only teach them what you know.  It is an expanding knowledge of the Word that gives you an expanding ministry.  (Like tennis)

If you follow what you have learned about our Lord, you will find yourself steadily improving.

If joy is not happening, then something is wrong.  You can enjoy a trial.

If you have lost your peace, you need to find out what you are doing wrong.

Counseling and the Body of Christ
If I am really going to help people, there are certain things I must expect of them.  I must recommend some Bible-believing churches.  Go to church Sunday morning and night, Sunday School Class, get acquainted with Christian people.

I expect people:
1) Attend some public meetings.
2) Read my books
3) Listen to some audio tapes
4) View some video tapes

The Biblical Standard
Think Biblical.  When you listen to someone, you are listening for deviation from the Word as a standard.  Your effectiveness will depend on your knowledge and application of the Bible.

Counseling Distinctives
It is the spirit within a man that causes him to rejoice or to despair.

It became plain to me that human happiness or misery is not based on our circumstances or the people in our lives, but on which spirit controls us from within.

The fruit of the Spirit, Paul wrote in Galatians 5, is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control.

Biblical Counseling and Secular Counseling
Similarities:
* The counselor recognizes the distress of his counselee as evidence that a problem exists.
* The counselor helps the counselee tell the whole story, bringing out all the facts, pleasant or unpleasant.
* The counselor listens with compassion, accepting the counselee regardless of the story
* The counselor treats the information with utmost care
* The counselor grants the counselee the right to make his own decisions and to lead his own kind of life

Differences:
* The biblical counselor compares his counselee's account with a fixed standard, the Bible
* The biblical counselor points out to the counselee the areas in which his experience agrees or differs with the standard of life that God sets forth in Scripture
* The humanist seeks to determine how the environment has affected the applicant's responses to life, whereas the biblical counselor seeks to determine if the applicant lives by the Spirit or by the desires of the sinful nature
* It should be clear to the counselee that the goal of a counseling session is to discover how the counselee's story fits with biblical principles.

The Counselor's Intentions On Behalf Of The Counselee

Listen long enough so that a biblical principle being violated comes to your mind.  Continue to listen until the data confirms your judgment and the counselee agrees.

Counselee Readiness
You must estimate when the counselee is ready to consider a biblical description of the problem and take some action.  Present your insight and leave the result with God.

Initially resist a glimpse of their sinful selves.  They will have a second response.  Look for that second reaction.

Covering up your sin, instead of being freed from, is a roadblock to making behavior match the heart's desire.

Almost everyone is capable of defining their problems and solving them with God's help.

Unconscious Conflicts vs. Personal Responsibility

God's invitation is to believe, receive, abide, come, and take.

Problem Analysis vs. Problem  Resolution
Understanding a person and his problems only makes his need clear.  He needs someone to reassure, instruct, and guide him to Christ who can change his heart.

The biblical counselor must recognize and deal with the inner nature of man - his mental, emotional and spiritual condition.

If the person rejects appealing to God for help, the biblical counselor has nothing else to offer.

When anyone turns to God, He will forgive and will change our responses to people and events in the future.

You Method of Counseling
Dealing with individuals and their needs is more a matter of getting across a message than following a single established method.

The following basic factors are essential in effective counseling.

Factor 1:  Be Compassionate

You must love the counselee enough to present him with God's truth regardless of what the truth may suggest for him.

But you must not force God's solution on the counselee.  Remember that he has the freedom of choice.

Factor 2:  Listen to the Problem

As counselor, you will listen for evidences of carnality - acts of the sinful nature.

You should have the same confidence in the benefits of God's message as the surgeon has in the benefits of an operation.

Listening is an art.  Therefore, seek to improve your asking and listening skills.

Factor 3:  Point the Counselee to a Solution

You should present God's solution from the Bible - and then it is up to the counselee to accept it or reject it.

Factor 4:  Use Other Counseling Tools

Introduce the individual to a group in the body of Christ.

The pulpit, prayer groups, Sunday School classes, youth groups, men's and women's groups, worship services, Bible studies, retreats.

Your basic tool is the Scriptures, which accurately mirror the soul.

Ten Procedural Tips
1. The counselor tends to be self-centered
2. The counselee is likely to be preoccupied with one problem
3. The counselor should listen for patterns
4. The counselor should listen for causes, not symptoms
5. Identify deeds of the sinful nature when you deal with resistance
6. Look for these types of behaviors in your counselee
* withdrawal
* defiance
* tears
* justification
* tantrums
* attack
* pouting
* illness
7. Learn to depend on your counselee's second reaction
8. Lead your counselee to proper fellowship with God
9. You should encourage:
* involvement in a healthy church
* reading Bible and biblically-based literature
* listening to biblically based cassettes
* developing a personal walk with God
* defining and solving personal, interpersonal, and environmental problems without your help
10. You should assign:
* Bible study
* Reading
* Cassettes

Summary	
1. Avoid cold contacts
2. Stress personal responsibility
3. Up to 80% of counselees will reject help
4. Do not promise to keep confidence
5. Always offer hope
6. Imparting knowledge does not always result in change
7. Judge your success in counseling on accuracy and the Spirit of your presentation of biblical principles, not on the counselee's response.

Counseling in the Body of Christ

The focus of counseling in the church should be discipleship.

Helping persons examine and reorder their life in light of Scripture is the goal of discipleship in biblical counseling.

Four Counseling Considerations
1. Most Christians come to see their pastor or other member of the church after they have explored other avenues.
2. often, the person simply wants someone to listen and sympathize with his situation.
3. Christians expect counseling to take a long time.
4. Some people refuse to be comforted.

The simplicity of God's Word contains everything needed for Christians to return to a Spirit-controlled life.

The Pastor/Counselor's Preparation
1. Make sure there is no unconfessed sin in your life.
2. Confess any known sin and by faith receive the cleansing you are promised.
3. If you are clean in heart, you are now eligible to claim the fullness of the Spirit by faith.
4. Remember Jesus' promise:  John 14:  16-17 (NIV)  Ask the Lord to fill you with that Spirit of truth as you listen to the person's story you are about to hear.
Your plan is to listen to this person's story until a violation of a biblical principle comes to your mind.Continue to listen until the person's story confirms your judgment and the person agrees.Let him look at a biblical mirror.  It may help him identify some sin he is not even thinking about.You must judge when the person is ready to face sin in his life.If a person repents, he should be encouraged to approach God on his own when needed.Get him started in "The Heart of the Problem" workbook.Follow up.  Make a date for the next appointment.Remember, there were three involved in that interview:  the counselee, The Holy Spirit, and you.  Reflect a moment and recall how God led you.Have the following available:Your BibleSpirit-Controlled vs. Sin-Controlled handoutThe Heart of the Problem workbookListening SheetQuestions which must be answered are:1.  Do you want to change?Are you willing to use God's plan for a change?Five Steps of RepentanceRepentance is rare but brings a cure when enacted.	Step 1:  "Lord, I Am Wrong!"	Step 2:  "Lord, I Am Sorry!"	      Remember, godly sorrow is not repentance but leads to repentance.	Step 3:  "Lord, Will You Forgive Me?"	Step 4:  "Lord, Cleanse Me!"	Step 5:  "Lord, Empower Me!"The Role of Repentance In CounselingSpiritual awakening carries with it a requirement of God's people.Dealing With SinCounseling is simply taking the Word of God and helping a person examine his heart in light of the Bible.Every sin is always serious.False HopesThe world says it is not his fault; it is a disease or an addiction.  He cannot control himself.You will never get rid of this, but we can teach you how to manage it.  God is much more gracious than that.  He offers a cure - Jesus.Jesus Christ can cure the alcoholic.Unfaithful to GodThe reason our marriages are falling apart like they are is not primarily because of our unfaithfulness to one another but to God.  Faithfulness to Him will bring a faithfulness to one another.Christians must see that sin is not primarily against one another but toward God.False ProphetsYou will know whether a word is from God if, when applied to your life, it makes a change in your life.Grace is greater than sin.  Grace will bring a heart for God.  A heart for God will bring a love and respect for His Word.  God's Word will bring adjustments to our life.Feeding On The WordI needed to take a spiritual bath.  My guidebook, the Bible.God's Promises  Ps 119:165Frustration is a warning to check up on your spirit.  Isa  26:3The effects of righteousness are peace and joy and quietness and confidence.  To want God's will with all my heart all of the time is an experience that I have not yet achieved.What short-circuits this kind of life?  Environment, family background, education, wrong friends, unfortunate experience?Prov 28:13He who does not prosper is covering up some sin.   Jeremiah 17:9  NIV We have much more respect for cancer or germs than we have for sin.Biblical StandardsDo you go to church regularly?Do you read the Bible regularly?Do you pray regularly?Many answer yes to all of these.  Rituals.Your job as a counselor is to identify specific sins in that person's life.Rom 7:21-23Sin And The Law1 John 3:4If it says that you should do it and you do not do it, you have sinned.  Sin is transgression of the law.  If it says you do not do it and you do, you have sinned.The Normal HeartDoctors know what a normal heart sounds like, so they can tell if you deviate from that normal heart.  You must know what normal Christian living is if you can determine how far your counselee deviates from the norm.Hunt For The Word Of GodA biblical counselor needs to experience a continuous hunger and thirst for the Word and a continuous awareness of walking in the Spirit.He gave it to us by word and by His life.  Now it is our turn to do the same.  We are His ambassadors.  The key is not just a knowledge of Scripture, but a relationship with the God of Scripture.  The Scriptures do not give life, Jesus does.A biblical counselor loves God and His Word, the Bible.  You might say he is addicted to partaking of it regularly.  He loves to share biblical truth with others.  He has a  happy, relaxed, wholesome attitude toward life.Focal PointsFood (the Word) and Water (the Holy Spirit) are necessary if the biblical counselor is to understand God's Word.Two words - biblical and counselor - are interesting as they are put together.  God's Word is the text used if any speech, book, or counseling is to be considered biblical.  The word counsel means, "to consult, confide in, consider."  If you are to be a biblical counselor, you must consult, confide in, and consider the person of Christ (truth) in the Bible.Saturating one's life in the Bible is a delight to the biblical counselor.Daily reading, meditating, and study of the Word are necessary for a counselor to stay fresh in a relationship with the Word (Jesus).  The Word is a person - Jesus (see John 1:1).  A relationship on a day-by-day basis is necessary if you are to use the Truth to set self or others free.There are two key subjects the biblical counselor needs to be well acquainted with:  sin, and the spirit-filled life. Teach Me To GrieveContentment is illusive.Isa 26:3Maintaining perfect peace is quite an illusive objective.What do you do when you ask  God for guidance and there is holy silence?Phil 4:6-7Finding a FutureLife goes on.Jeremiah 29:11-13Isaiah 43:18-19We are to relinquish the past with all its happy memories and press on to embrace whatever the Lord allows in our lives.Coping with GriefDeath is a part of life.How do you handle grief?How do you handle coming home to an empty house?Focusing my goals.Focusing my love.Focusing my purpose.	We are not here to be served, but to serve.Continuing EducationHere are some lessons that I have learned from coping.1)  Lasting fellowship requires a transformed heart.  Human interaction ultimately exposes raw selfishness, harshness, meanness, and coldness - either expressed or bottled up.2)  Lasting fellowship makes it clear that only God ultimately satisfies.  Life and death go together.  I have learned to be content and satisfied without any human beings around.Psalms 16:11To sum it up, we all need a Savior and Lord who will sustain us, comfort us, quiet our hears, and give us compassion toward others.  No human being can take God's place.A prepared heart has no fear of death and what lies beyond.A person who has experienced bereavement would surely be able to sympathize and empathize with another bereaved person more completely than someone who has never experienced bereavement.  Not so.  Faith in God is not transferable.  The other person must take a step of faith alone.  Do their own yielding.  I can describe, recommend, plead, teach, and be an example.  But the other person has the power of choice.Comforting the BereavedFor the Spirit-filled Christian, the inner person matches outward behavior.When you must deal with the bereaved, it is crucial to make yourself available and follow this sound biblical advice.Prov 3:5-6You will then judge your efforts by the level of your trust rather than the response of the bereaved.It is not easily discernible how a person is handling death or what their response is to your efforts to comfort them.1.  There is no way to predict how any person will react to the death of another person.There is no formula that will guide you into what to say or what to do around, or for, a bereaved person.  Sometimes the best thing to do is to say nothing.Their response to death will depend on some factors that you may not know about when you attempt to comfort the bereaved.Jesus instructs us to forgive men their trespasses and to love one another.Grief and Unrepented  SinIsa 59:1-21 Cor 15:56The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.In the presence of death, our sins sting us and weigh heavily on our hearts.If it's sin, there is no human remedy.  Only God can help.  Repentance is the key.  Repentance implies that I am wrong and sorry and willing to be cleansed and renewed.Before our meeting, she thought that admitting her condition would flood her with guilt.Ignoring her sins produced misery and guilt.  She was indeed a new person.  Now she was free to yield to the Holy Spirit.AdulteryPornography is based on the lust of the eyes that quickens the whole body.Anybody who is committing adultery is sinning against God and flirting with hell.  But the biblical counselor can say it lovingly, tenderly, and kindly.Adultery is an act of the sinful nature.Adultery and Other SinsHere is a list of some sins that are associated with adultery:Debauchery		HatredDiscordJealousyFits of RageSelfish AmbitionDissensionsPutting the Pieces Back TogetherWhat will happen when the other partner finds out?  That all depends on the spiritual condition of the partner, not on the behavior of the adulterer.An unforgiving spirit is not caused by another person's choices.  It is revealed by another's choice.Sex problems have nothing to do with technique.  Sex problems have nothing to do with attraction.What you will find is that a man and his wife have accumulated a whole bunch of unresolved issues - deadlocks.  He is doing things she does not life, and he refuses to quit.Selfishness.  Self-centeredness.FlatteryThe backdrop for this problem is a heart crammed full of bitterness and hate toward an inconsiderate husband.Adultery begins in the heart.The source of hope:  GodPhysical Attraction vs. CommitmentSexuality and love are not the same thing.Marriage is a commitment.  Love is a work of the Spirit.Conflict between you and your spouse is what makes touching that individual undesirable, whereas before it was highly desirable.When we talk about losing our love, we mean we are building an invisible wall of unresolved reactions toward your partner.  Take that wall down and what is it made of?Wrath, anger, bitterness, stubbornness, resentment, jealousy, and envy.  You deal with those, and you will find your sexual response being restored toward your partner.The Spectrum of LoveHenry Drummond wrote, The Greatest  Ting in the World...love...likened it to light.  If you pass light through a crystal prism, it emerges on the other side o f the prism broken into its component parts:  Paul passes love through the prism of his inspired intellect and it comes out on the other side broken into its elements.  Drummond calls this the  Spectrum of Love.  Has nine components:1.   Patience        "love suffers longKindness        and is kind; Generosity     love does not envy;Humility	love does not parade itself , is not puffed up;Courtesy	does not behave rudely,Unselfishness	does not seek its own,Good temper	is not provoked,Guilelessness	thinks no evil;Sincerity	does not rejoice in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth."As you demonstrate your love for God, you will be loving your marriage partner and your family - and, indeed, everybody - in the same love.Since God is the source, this love can be universally applied.The Marriage RelationshipIt is the relationship - the duties and details of marriage - that sets a man and a woman apart.Marriage is the most sacred and intimate of all relationships.  Love is a universal thing, marriage has no monopoly on it.Love never got anyone into trouble.  Relationships often do.  The relationship that binds you and your mate together is exclusively yours.To yield to the love of God is to produce a perfect love toward others, including the marriage partner.  Conversely, faulty relationships result from a faulty relationship with God.  A marriage based on sincere love for God can be disturbed only when something comes between one or the other of the individuals and God.Love involves a relationship between you and God and does not have anything to do with your partner.  If you say you have lost your love for your partner, you are saying you have drifted away from an effective relationship with God.  The presence of your partner makes it obvious.Marriage is a relationship, a commitment - a special kind of relationship, but not a special kind of emotion.Marriages are collapsing all over the world because we are looking for some kind of chemistry that does not exist.How To Deal With AngerThe American Heritage Dictionary defines anger this way:an ger n.  1.  A feeling of extreme displeasure, hostility, indignation, or exasperation toward someone or something; rage; wrath; ire.  2.  OBSOLETE.  Trouble; pain; affliction.  Synonyms:  anger, rage, fury, ire, wrath, resentment, indignation.These nouns denote varying degrees of marked displeasure.  Anger, the most general, denotes strong, usually temporary displeasure without specifying manner of expression.  Rage and fury are closely related in the sense of intense, uncontained, explosive emotion.  Fury can be more destructive, rage more justified by circumstances.  Ire is a poetic term for anger.  Wrath applies especially to fervid anger that seeks vengeance or punishment on an epic scale.  Resentment refers to ill will and suppressed anger generated by a sense of grievance.  One feels indignation at seeing the mistreatment of someone or something dear and worthy.The Universality of AngerEveryone struggles with anger.You cannot decide to be angry.  You can take elaborate precautions to avoid being angry.  But, sooner or later, anger underneath your skin is triggered by memory, someone's behavior, a conversation, a phone call, or a letter.  It can cause your heart to beat faster, make you sweat, tense up your muscles, foul up your digestive system, alter the way you think, dictate how you act, and trigger words from your mouth.A Faulty Perception Of Anger"My anger is a normal and justifiable response to the way I was treated."We freely describe ourselves and our problems as being caused by other people.  But it is very difficult to say the simple words, "I am wrong.  I have sinned."Eph  4:26If there is no repentance, it could lead to other acts of the sinful nature.I don't always know why it happens, but when it does I need to call it by is right name:  sin.Anger Is DestructiveNegative responses can cause much misery in life.Almost everyone resists calling any kind of anger sin.  Multitudes of people have faced up to problems such as drinking, swearing, or stealing as sin and it's behind us.  It's been dealt with.Dealing with anger is different.  You can be completely and totally repentant over your anger.  Confession leads to welcome relief from tension.  You think you have dealt with it, and it shows up again.Anger can be so mild as to be almost unnoticeable.  This "annoyance level" of anger is easy to ignore.Extreme anger is easy to recognize and impossible to ignore.A drop of anger is not so easy to recognize.  To put it another way, it is easy to ignore.  Bodily changes are hardly noticeable, but the effects are cumulative.  The symptoms are anxiety, restlessness, and tension.  Drops of anger build up in the body.  Finally, one more incident and anger spills over the top.Effects Of Anger Can Build Up SlowlyOur response to people and circumstances on the outside of us constantly reminds us of the condition inside us.What The Bible Says About AngerMost persons who seek counsel will argue that they have the right to be angry.  Of course they have the right to be angry.  But as long as they argue in defense of their wrath, they will see no need nor have any desire to change and thus be delivered from the unhappiness of anger.Eph 4:26Eph 4:31Galatians 5:16  says clearly that people who walk in the  Spirit need not struggle with anger, which is an act of the sinful nature.  There is no human remedy.  Only God can cleanse your heart.Notice what other biblical advice there is about the management of anger.James 1:20Rom 12:19Eph 4:31How can a human being who naturally responds angrily to the circumstances of life, change from responding in anger to responding in love?The Bible offers a radical solution:  "Put it away.  Stop it."The Steps To ChangeStep 1:  Recognize Anger As Sin	Strife, malice, hatred, anger, outbursts or wrath, dissension, and contention are works of the flesh - of the sinful nature.  They are sin, and that's good news, because there is a divine solution of sin.1 John 1:9Step 2:  Replace Anger With Godly Emotions		When you have a forgiven, cleansed heart, you can ask God for the power of the Holy Spirit to produce the fruit of the Spirit in your life.Replacing Anger With LoveTo try to live the Christian life without total dependence on the Holy Spirit is a contradiction in terms.  Anything less is just acting.Many people have enough self-control to act the way they choose to act.  They can rightly say, "Now that I know what to do, I will act like a Christian."  They think they are in total control of their own lives.  What they have is only a sad counterfeit that appears to be a cure.To forgive and to be forgiven go hand in hand.  When someone trespasses against us, we usually must deal with our own sins as well as with the other person.Forgiveness freed from the non-productive and destructive emotions which chained and enslaved to the object of his anger.Psychology books classify both anger and joy as emotions.  Yet in the Bible, anger is called an act of the sinful nature.  Joy is called a fruit of the Spirit.  It doesn't take a theologian to conclude that if you elevate one work of the flesh as "God-given," then you should do the same for all of them.The Christian has two options:  (1) to repent - recognizing that anger is sin - and to yield self to the cleansing and empowering ministry of the Holy Spirit; or (2) to attempt to manage the anger in the sinful heart.  It is self-control versus a lifetime dependence on Spirit-control.A Plan For RepentanceJohn 3:19-20Unrepentant, intelligent people believe that they can justify their anger because God gets angry.Perhaps 95 percent of anyone's anger is plain, old-fashioned sin, and we all know it.  Anger plagues everyone.Deceit and HypocrisyDeceit is the deliberate attempt to mislead someone.  Hypocrisy is the pretended possession of those qualities that would make others believe in one's sincerity, goodness, devotion, etc.You don't break God's laws (disobey authority) without paying a personal price of inner tension.He was the architect of his own misery.The First Act Of ConcealmentIt is an awful hour when the first necessity of hiding something comes.  The whole life is different thenceforth.When there are questions to be feared and eyes to be avoided and subjects which must not be touched, then the bloom of life is gone.  Can your actions stand publicity?You either reveal or conceal what is on your mind.A deceitful relationship is self-defeating.When you misrepresent yourself to others - that is, when you lie and deceive others, for any reason - you violate a commandment.Eph 4:25To deceive another is to chip away at your own self-respect, even though you receive praise and good will as a result.You err when your sense of self-respect is based on the spiritual condition of another person.  You build your own self-respect when your words, behavior, emotions, and mental activity line up with God's commandments.Prov 14:10You can hear what I say and observe what I do, but you cannot judge the accuracy of what I say, nor can you judge my motives or my sincerity.  You and I must stand or fall before God alone, when it comes to our mental activity.Separate OpinionsIf your minds are divided, you are not together.There are a variety of ways to come to a meeting of minds:	1.	agreementconcessioncompromiseacceptance of authorityBeing like-minded is a continuous process, and the process will reveal the spirit.Constant changes force us to make adjustments.  All require daily decisions.Negotiating new agreements can be fun only if you approach one another unselfishly, humbly, and keep the importance of the other person in mind.In the effort to come to a meeting of minds, you tend to get caught up in your own interest and lose sight of the others person's.  Remember, to come to a meeting of minds implies a difference of opinion in the first place.Phil 2:4The Servant AttitudeIt is not the pay that makes you a servant.  It is the giving of yourself totally to your task.  This spirit is required if you are to be like-minded.  You give yourself totally and completely to find a basis for a meeting of minds with whomever you must cooperate. Training, ability, power, or wealth do not exempt you from making a continuous effort to maintain like-mindedness.Managing Your Inner LifeEvery day you will either reveal or conceal feeling, emotions, attitudes, intentions, and thoughts stimulated by people and events.You cannot control what other people do around you.  Neither can you control all the events of the day.  How you respond will either build up or chip away at your self-respect and self-love, depending on how you manage what goes on underneath your skin.We are at least vaguely aware of our evil inner life, but we hate to admit it.  We tend to turn away from such light.There is hope.  When we finally quit running, the Lord will search our hearts, show us our evil ways, clean us up, and fill us with His strength.Like any other agreement, his step is taken at a point in time never to be forgotten or confused with other times.  But such a crisis works itself out from a point to a line.  It involves a continual drawing upon His resources as each occasion for it comes, just as a decision to maintain an exercise program must be renewed day by day.Becoming A Truthful Person Col 3:12-13HumanismBy definition, the social sciences study how people affect one another as they interact with one another.  Belief in God's intervening in human affairs is not a consideration.  Accordingly, the Bible is also not considered.  Note that the biblical view of man is not discussed.  It is not ruled out; it is not considered.A student of the social sciences will note that the description of how people behave and interact with each other is the same as described in the Bible.  What is easily overlooked is that the cause and cure differ.A few comparisons will be useful to understand where we differ.The Human IdealThe Bible and secular psychology are in general agreement.  Qualities such as love, joy peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control are basic and necessary if human beings are to live together harmoniously.The humanist believes that the human being possesses the power and the ability to experience these qualities.  The process for developing these qualities is through reliance on intelligence, the scientific method, social cooperation, and faith in the essential decency of mankind.The Christian believes that the human being does not possess the power and ability to experience these qualities.  They are readily available to human beings and are the work of the Holy Spirit of God.  The source of these qualities is out of this world.  The process involves a transaction between God and a human being.Human MaladjustmentThere is general agreement between humanists and Christians that behavior patterns such as evil thoughts, pride, hate, anger, deceit, dissension, slander (malicious misrepresentation), theft, selfishness, drunkenness, and sexual immorality are self-defeating and unhealthy.Humanists believe such behavior has its origin outside the person, as a product of human experience within a culture.  The human being has within himself the power and ability to correct these responses through reliance on intelligence, the scientific method, social cooperation and faith in the essential decency of mankind.The Christian believes that human experience within a culture stirs up such behavior which has its roots within the human being, called the acts of the sinful nature, or sin.  The Christian says there is no human remedy for sin within the person.  The solution involves God and the person.Basis For Humanistic OptimismWhat can be done to help restless, disturbed people become people whose response to life is more like the description of the fruit of the  Spirit?  If is indeed sin that we are dealing with, the question would be how to manage a sinful nature!  The humanist is making some progress.  There is a supernatural way to change the sinful heart.  The world says, for example, that alcoholism is a disease; you can manage this disease, but you cannot get rid of it.  The world sees this as a kindly approach.  At the same time, the world would say that Christians are harsh and unkind by saying that drunkenness is sin.  Deceptive philosophy tries to show the Christian as harsh and the world as kind.  However, the opposite is true.  The Christians offer a real Cure - Christ!  The world only offers management of ongoing problems.Truth, Professionalism, ServanthoodThe humanist would describe anger, hate, love, and joy as manageable human emotions.  The Bible calls anger and hate acts of the sinful nature and love and joy the fruit of the Spirit.  In dealing with these you will look at the environment if you follow the humanist.  You will look to God if you follow the Bible.The Bible is the standard to evaluate the truth of any other literature or speech.TruthSpeaking the truth means to test what you are thinking by the Bible before you speak.  Speaking truth in love is necessary.  The truth itself is not enough.ProfessionalismIf you love the people who come to you and are interested in helping them, that is a professional attitude.Professionalism requires sticking to the point.The Professional's TimeSchedule time at home into my calendar.I think it is an insult to my wife to brush her aside.  I am busy with other things.  I find that my children need me.  I have a life to live and I must keep a balance between my personal life and my work.I must take time to be alone.  I am not only a husband and a father, but I am also a person.To be a helpful pastor requires you to be a wholesome person.There were times when people could not see Jesus.  Like Jesus, you must keep you life in balance.An hour of good wholesome relationship is a lot better than a day of strife.The Professional's RecordsIf you are too busy to keep records, you are too busy.ServanthoodBeing a servant dos not mean to just be a miscellaneous errand boy.  If you are a good servant, you must do your job.The Servant's PrioritiesThere are some things that you cannot do.You must discipline yourself to accomplish anything constructive.The Servant's RestThere are times when you must admit you were wrong.The Servant's LimitationsThe important thing is that you are in the right spirit and that you are truthful.There is definitely a point of diminishing returns in prolonging an interview.When an hour is over, I say, "We have talked about this long enough.  Here is the point we have made:  Go home and process this with God and come back to discuss it next time."If you have defined a problem within a half an hour but the counselee does not like it and wants to spend another half and hour talking you out of it, you are wasting your half hour.PrayerI seldom pray with anybody.  I do pray for them.  I also tell them what to pray for.  I am not the mediator.  I am not a priest.  I may help someone to clarify their problem, but I seldom pray with them.Many problems people face involve a personal encounter with God.I do not beg and plead and agonize with people.  I try to help them describe the problem and see their sin.Where To Turn For Self-HelpEveryone alive must deal with what the Bible calls the acts of the sinful nature.  Everyone is driven to respond to the world around us in a way that the Bible calls the fruit of the Spirit.Everyone has two  options:  to turn to God for help, or to turn to the world for help.  It's like determining if you are headed north or south.  Those are opposite directions.ExerciseAnyone who lives heartily, joyously, and happily, who is calm, still and quiet should have some kind of exercise program to keep the body in shape.Muscle RelaxationQuiet ActivityBooks, watching television, listening to music, hobbies, college and professional athletic teams to watch, and a variety of entertainment.BusinessChangeChemicalsShakespeare said, "Oh God!  That men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains."What a fascinating list of ways to deal with today's tension.  Yes, it's a great world, with endless ways to find peace.Sooner or later, all our efforts to find peace from this world turn to ashes.  When we slow down or are trapped by circumstances and people, the tension, restlessness, anxiety, and frustration return.The relief that the world gives seems interchangeable with the relief God gives.  Be advised that the source is not the same.How To Tap God's PeaceThere is a deeper kind of peace than that which simply relieves body and mind.  It comes when you yield yourself  to God and let His peace invade your soul.We stumble over the simplicity of this step.  You are born again (or saved) when you believe Jesus.  He said that you have access to the peace of God through Him.The starting point is when you ask Him to invade your life - when you open the door and invite Him in.Jesus gives you access to God's resources:  peace, joy, hope, and patience. You need not be in a dither over anything.  You can stop striving and let His peace guard your heart, mind, and body.It does not follow that, because you have access to strength from God, you will give Him your troubles, injustices, hatreds, hostility, conflicts, ill will.  You can, but you can also nurse them within your body.The biblical counselor, then, will refer a counselee to a clinically trained person or to a physician if the person has rejected turning to God and has chosen to live with the sinful nature - and has turned to the world for help.It is important to note that the acts of the sinful nature are not beyond God's ability to heal.  Nor are these acts beyond the biblical counselor's level of competency.  If you want God's help, you have access to His resources.